

	For a group that holds weekly meetings in the campus center's ‘fishbowl room', so called because of its central location and large, floor-to-ceiling windows, Tea Talks is surprisingly secretive organization. Each meeting begins with a confidentiality disclaimer, and emails informing members of the next meeting are always blind carbon copied. This is a necessary measure – as Wellesley's only support group for queer students of Asian descent, Tea Talks is especially sensitive to the complexities of providing a safe space for this particular group of people. "Tea Talks aims to create a support community," says one of the organization's two presidents. "We focus on promoting acceptance within the Asian community as well as helping students cope with cultural issues that are unique to being a queer person of Asian descent." For students faced with reconciling these two identities, Tea Talks provides a setting in which to relate and, at times, commiserate.s
	Tea Talks' ice breaker activity that day involved tossing around a balloon with a variety of questions written on it that ranged from the mundane to the deeply personal. The members tossed it to one another, stopping each time to answer the questions their hands landed on.  One member caught the ball and squinted at it. "I got, ‘can you do gangnam style'?" she laughed. Other questions on the ball were more serious, such as ‘What aspect of Wellesley queer culture bothers you most?' or ‘If you were to come out to one member of your family, who would it be?'. 
      Family dynamics are a major point of discussion during Tea Talks. Nearly every topic seems to find its way back to how it relates to the structure of a ‘traditional' Asian family. "Dealing with parents – specifically with parents or family members who hold their cultures very close – is one of the most common issues we discuss here," says the president. Though members come from a range of backgrounds, from being the child of a mixed race family to being second-generation to being an international student, their discussion of home strings together a cohesive picture of the ways that their lives are inextricably intertwined with their family's history and Asian identity. One member shares her struggle coming out to her conservative Chinese parents. Another talked about her own experience as the second child in her family to come out. "My parents were so supportive," she said, "like, almost surprisingly supportive. But we've all agreed to not tell my grandparents. They're Indian and super conservative, so I don't think that would work." The members of Tea Talks understand each other's experiences in a way that tied less to race than it is to culture; the various cultures that these students come from share commonalities linked to being queer that are unifying despite other differences. 
      Tea Talks also finds common ground in discussing the aspects of being queer and Asian at Wellesley. According to the organization's president, another major issue shared by the queer Asian community is the pressure to assimilate to white queer students, especially those who presented as being masculine of center. During the meeting, one member raised her hand and said, "I think I've developed white people exhaustion." Over ensuing laughter, she continued, "No seriously, I'm sick of complaining about them all the time. Why can't we put that energy towards fostering a more cohesive Asian queer community?" The president later echoed her sentiments, saying, "This community could use support, specifically in the form of hosting events that help engender better community on campus and inform others of queer Asian issues." Tea Talks seeks to define an understanding of queerness that expands beyond the popular conception of a gay, white female. In doing so, it also works toward deconstructing ideas of what it means to be Asian and tries to foster a more nuanced and accepting Asian community.
      There is a complex and unspoken understanding shared between the members of Tea Talks that is as much connected to being queer as it is to being Asian. These identities complicate each other through the process of coexisting and therefore synthesize a new, intersectional identity unique to those who share it. Tea Talks offers a community based on common experiences, concerns, and aspirations that is intentionally accessible only to those who need it. In a particularly illustrative moment, a member of Tea Talks raised their hand and said, "I told my friend that I was going to Tea Talks. She said, ‘Okay! I hope you have fun drinking tea!"


