
      There is a double standard built into the language of human rights. The inclusion of the syntactical modifier ‘human' in the term ‘human rights' itself suggests that these rights should apply to all, and thus be universal; but, all rights being inherently constructions of society, specific to culture, time and institution, universality is impossible. The theories of cultural relativism and cultural universalism attempt to eliminate this contradiction by specifying the cultural framework within which human rights should or should not exist. These theories constitute the two sides of opinion on this subject. Jack Donnelly, in his article "Cultural Relativism and Universal Human Rights", defines the two by stating that strong proponents of relativism hold that the validity of a right should be dependent on culture, while strong proponents of universalism hold that culture should not be a factor in the validity of human rights1. The core issue with the two poles of cultural relativism and universalism is that they are theories that attempt to eliminate, not reconcile, the complexities of human rights. To implement human rights well, complexity must not be disregarded and instead taken into account. 
      The attempt to integrate cultural universalism and relativism in order to reconcile the contradiction of universalism within human rights is impractical as the two are ultimately incommensurable. The theory on which social relativism is based posits that all cultures are so separate and individual from each other as to be exempt from judgment, whereas the theory on which social universalism is based submits that a culture's individuality is irrelevant. The two theories, having opposite foundations, are destined to be the two sides of a Mobius strip – opposite sides of the same thing, and thus never to touch. Rather than attempting to view human rights from a combined perspective of universalism and relativism, it is much more practical to see it as neither. Human rights are complicated, multi-dimensional entities even within themselves. To expect that any human right can fall cleanly into being relevant or not to culture is to lay an unrealistic foundation for a conversation about cultural relativism. Rather than view relativism on a right by right basis, it would be more useful to do so on a case by case basis. This means that cultural relativism should be seen less as a philosophical rule but more as a tool with which to better implement a human right in a given area or time. Less energy should be spent on reconciling the notions of relativism and universalism, as it would be impossible, and more on repurposing this spectrum of cultural relativity, which includes arguments of relativism, universalism and their combinations. 
      There are certain human rights conversations in which the discussion of cultural relativity is more important than in others. Specifically, keeping in mind cultural relativity is important when attempting to understand the cultural context of a human right. The 1983 Japanese film The Ballad of Narayama outlines this with clarity. The film presents a fictional impoverished village in which men and women over the age of 70 must travel to a mountain to die. The concept of the human right to life is brought into question. In this village where there is never enough to sustain those who inhabit it, necessity in times of scarcity, rather than individual rights, becomes the ruling value. Though it is easy to write off the scenario in The Ballad of Narayama as simply being a violation of human rights, brutal and animalistic, to truly understand and thus amend the lack of importance placed on the human right to life in the film, one must understand the necessity of such population control in times of great scarcity. What this film in essence teaches us is that the only way to even attempt allaying the denial of human rights is by stopping its cause. In this process of understanding the origins of a human rights problem, history and culture must be taken into account. However, the process of then amending these conditions should be free from such restrictions. The alleviation of any societal stress can only be burdened by conversations regarding cultural relativity. There is no culture in which human suffering is or should be the norm, and thus cultural relativity is essentially irrelevant. When the problem that necessitates a human rights violation is solved, the conversation can then be again opened up to arguments surrounding cultural relativity, specifically regarding the ways a practice, once necessary, has become a cultural ritual or institution, and how then the practice can be changed. Ultimately, it is most effective and efficient to use cultural relativity as a tool when dissecting the problem underlying a human rights issue and ensuring its implementation in the aftermath, but not when ameliorating the underlying issue itself. 
      To elaborate upon this idea of using of cultural relativism as a tool, it would be useful to examine a specific case of a human rights violation. A challenging case because of its cultural and historical context is that of the one-child policy in China. China, often criticized by Western critics for committing multiple violations of human rights, is also a country ripe with issues of overpopulation and scarcity and degradation of resources2. China, the most populous country in the world with over 1.3 billion people, is also the country with the fastest growing economy34. China's rapid development in the last half century has caused unfortunately high rates of population growth and environmental degradation, which have lead to decreased standards of living, the attempted reversal of which has lead the government to resort extreme policies. The One Child Policy, introduced in 1978, was meant to reduce these issues by limiting the number of children urban couples, with a few exceptions, could have to one child, such that the annual population growth, at the time over one percent, would be zero percent in the year 20005. Deputy Qian Xinzhong, the Minister of Public Health at the time, said that, at the existing rate of population growth,  "We will be compelled to devote a considerable amount of financial and material resources to feeding the newly increased populace […] slowing down the four modernizations. […] That means on the average each couple as of now can have only one child"6. To ensure that this goal would be met, Chinese officials, in the years that followed, instituted a variety of policies, including but not limited to financial incentives to have less children, required sterilization or abortion, and compulsory birth control for those with over the acceptable amount of children7. The One Child Policy and the policies of enforcement that followed it are subjects of much contention within China and internationally, and is interesting to examine in the context of human rights and cultural relativity.
      The compulsory birth control required by the One Child Policy violates the basic human right to life and, more specifically, to the control of one's body. Indeed, the United Nations' World Population Conference in 1974 specified in the World Population Plan of Action, adopted by China, that all individuals have "the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education, and means to do so"8. To view China's denial of this right from a cultural relativist or universalist standpoint is ultimately ineffective. A cultural relativist would deem this issue to be beyond the boundaries of outsider intervention, a response which seems to belittle the gravity of the denial of the basic right to human life and choice; a cultural universalist, on the other hand, would suggest the complete striking of the One Child Policy, which is, in terms of diplomacy and feasibility alone, unlikely and impractical, and which is, in terms of overpopulation and environmental degradation, bound to result in negative consequences. Furthermore, any combination of cultural relativism and universalism as an approach to keeping or getting rid of the One Child Policy is ultimately ineffective if China, diplomatically, will not respond to it. Historically, China has not taken well to international critique of the One Child Policy, having made very few amendments to the legislation in the time between its ratification and now, and statistics released even seem to suggest that the vast majority of the population, 76%, remain in favor of the policy9. In short, direct attacks of the One Child Policy itself have historically proven to be ineffective, regardless of what level of cultural relativism it has been approached from. Instead of attempting to directly combat the One Child Policy from a lens of cultural relativism, it is more effective to use cultural relativism in an analysis of what made the One Child Policy seem so essential and supported, and then attempt to amend the core issue such that the policy is no longer deemed a necessity. 
      An important factor behind the implementation of this policy is the overpopulation of the country, and the resulting lack of resources to sustain such a population. The "financial and material resources to [feed] the newly increased populace" was cited originally, in 1978, by the Minister of Health of China as the central reason why methods of compulsory birth control needed to be introduced. The issue of scarcity and degradation of resources due to overpopulation extends to beyond the issues raised by the One Child Policy – it is one of the greatest problems plaguing China today. Thus, an attempt to diplomatically solve this issue would be more practical, both in terms of amending the violation of human rights and raising the standard of living in China itself. Using cultural relativity as a tool with which to understand the history of the One Child Policy as well as the current cultural environment that hinders or helps the issue of overpopulation would be very useful. Unfortunately, overpopulation in China has been a problem for a number of years and has been subject to much discussion in the international forum with slow signs of improvement. But combating issue of overpopulation itself, though very difficult, is still more useful than attempting to directly combat the legislation of the One Child Policy because it lends itself to easier diplomatic conversations and also deals with an issue greater than a single act of legislation. 
      However, this issue is far more complex than a single problem of overpopulation. China's goal in implementing the One Child Policy was ultimately modernization – by ridding the country of issues of overpopulation, resources would be freed to be used to modernize the country. As no one is to say what extent of modernization is the stopping point for China, there is little way to know when the One Child Policy will be dismantled because it is no longer useful with regard to modernization. There are constantly new issues being raised with increased modernization and technology that constantly challenge what we deem to be the ‘universal' standard of human rights. As the very idea of universalism changes, the ideas of cultural relativism must then change too. Furthermore, in an increasingly interconnected world where less and less is independent of global influence, it is unclear where one culture begins and another ends. For instance, in China, it is difficult to assess to what extent China's attempts of modernization are as a result of Western influence, and thus to what extent we are responsible for the violations of human rights it commits. As the smaller worlds of individual cultures begin expanding to be inclusive of more global influences, the usefulness of cultural relativism must be brought into question, and the idea of a ‘universal' standard of human rights must be reassessed. 

	  