
Introduction
      In 1949, Harry Truman signed into law a new policy of urban renewal, allowing cities to seize undesirable areas of land and redevelop them into higher class communities. "The slum means disease and crime; the new projects mean health and happiness!" proclaimed William O'Dwyre, the contemporary mayor of New York City (Epstein, 2011). Urban renewal policies have a long history of positive public support in the United States. The concept of redevelopment has for a long time been viewed as a positive change for both cities and citizens. Today, many social scientists realize that there is a tragic shadow to urban renewal. This tragic shadow comes in the form of gentrification. Cities in the United States today are experiencing ground-breaking levels of gentrification, as policies of urban renewal ultimately displace lower-income communities. 
      In conducting our research, we used three core questions as guides.  First, what vulnerabilities are experienced by the poor in terms of housing? Second, what factors directly or indirectly contribute to gentrification? And third, what are the effects of gentrification on individuals and communities?  While investigating these core questions, we used our own hometowns as case-studies for the overarching effects of gentrification. San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston are three of the top ten gentrified cities in the United States today, so it made sense on both a personal and a logistical level to use these cities as settings for our research. Finally, we attempted to ground our research in a sociological context by approaching the process of gentrification through the lens of Pierre Bourdieu's forms of capital. We found that the process of gentrification, as shown in the case studies of San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston, is in its most basic form the encroachment of capital of elite classes on the capital of lower classes. 

Gentrification
           Gentrification is a structural and intentional shift in the makeup of an urban population that has cascading effects on a community's cultural, economic, and social capital. The most general definition of gentrification characterizes it as the arrival of wealthier people into an existing urban neighborhood. It is a process "driven by private developers, landlords, businesses, and corporations, and supported by the government through policies" (Causa Justa/Just Cause, 2014).  In a report published by Causa Justa/Just Cause, gentrification was defined "as a profit-driven racial and class reconfiguration of urban, working-class and communities of color that have suffered from a history of disinvestment and abandonment" (2014, p.8). Most commonly, as in the case of this report, the word gentrification is negatively used however; it does in fact have positive impacts on the city and the lives of people. In an article published by The San Francisco Bay Guardian, Joe Fitzgerald Rodriguez articulated this sentiment, that "increased affluence helps beautify neighborhoods and makes them safer" (2014). Unfortunately, "while gentrification may bring much-needed investment to urban neighborhoods, displacement prevents these changes from benefitting residents who may need them the most" (Ibid). Thus, it is often the new wealthier arrivals that disproportionately get to enjoy the positive changes that come with gentrification.
While there is no concrete universal definition of what gentrification is, it usually indicates four main types of changes that a community undergoing gentrification will experience. Urban planner Benjamin Grant described these changes to be in the areas of demographics, real estate markets, land use, and culture and character (2003). The demographic change usually refers to an increase in the median household income, a decrease in racial minorities and a reduction in overall household size. The real estate markets experience an increase in rent and home prices, evictions, and luxury housing developments. Gentrification also dictates how the land will be utilized. For example, there is a decline in the industrial use of land and an increase in retail, restaurants, and office spaces. Lastly, gentrification can cause cultural and character shifts, which can either be in the form of informal or legal changes. This may include changes in architecture, landscape, public behavior impact the overall feel of an area. 

The Role of Capital
      To aid us in organizing our argument on the effects of gentrification, we will employ the sociological concept of capital in our analysis. Pierre Bourdieu, in his seminal work "The Forms of Capital", breaks down capital into three distinct subtypes - economic, cultural, and social capital (1985). Economic capital, the most tangible form of capital, encapsulates resources such as wealth or property that are directly convertible into money. Cultural capital can be broken down into three categories - the embodied, objectified, and institutionalized forms. The embodied form of cultural capital refers to the learned or inherited set of habits, preferences, and culture, otherwise known as habitus. The objectified form consists of physical objects that symbolically convey status, such as works of art or literature. The institutionalized form of cultural capital consists of recognized merits or credentials, often manifested by educational institutions. Collectively, cultural capital confers status and allows access to resources. Finally, social capital refers to the resources linked to membership in a group of people. Social capital in the form of social networks, in particular, can also be used as a tool to reproduce capital intergenerationally. 
      Moving forward, we will use the three different case studies to examine the effect that gentrification has on each type of capital. 

San Francisco, California  -  The Impact of Economic Capital
      The pressures of gentrification have been impacting San Francisco since World War II. However, recently with the increase in technology companies in the greater Bay Area, the pressure and effects of gentrification have become more intense, especially on the low-income and poor population of San Francisco. The city is facing a historic economic boom largely caused by the increasing amount of tech workers and companies moving into the city. This influx, commonly referred to as the tech boom, has been going on for the last five years. Many low-income residents are not supportive of the new wave of workers because it has caused massive amounts of displacement for them. 
      Geographically, San Francisco has no room left to expand. Shown in the image to the left, the majority of the city is surrounded by water and further south of the city represents other cities and neighborhoods. These physical limitations are a major issue when it comes to gentrification because there is nowhere for residents to go when they are pushed out of their original homes in the new highly desired parts of the city (Kloc, 2014). Limited available space in the city makes the population relatively fixed. Thus, when new people come in, the only other place for the original residents to go is out. This geographical set-up of the city makes it very difficult for the poor, who lack economic capital, to stay in the city because the property is being sold to the highest buyer and these people cannot afford to own a home, especially one at the new skyrocketing market prices.
      Since the increased presence of tech workers and companies, San Francisco has experienced the impact of gentrification. For people living in poverty or those who are extremely low-income, affordable or subsidized housing is vital to their livelihood. In the case of San Francisco, many of the tenants, previous to the tech boom, lived in rented apartments or homes where they were able to pay reasonable rent prices. However, when employees of these large tech companies began to move into the city, the median rent price rose to about $3,000 with some neighborhoods as high as $4,000-5,000 a month (Hudson, 2014). This is an example of the real estate market change that is often associated with gentrification when these higher earning people come in. Landlords or property owners can now rent or sell their property to these newcomers at higher prices than the current low-income tenants can afford, leading to a surge in rent prices. 
      Another change that San Francisco has experienced is in minimum wage. San Francisco currently has the highest minimum wage rate in the country at over $10 an hour (Hudson, 2014). Despite this, journalist Adam Hudson states that someone relying solely on a minimum wage income would need to work at least 5 or 6 jobs to be able to afford rent alone in the city (2014, p.4). The fact that someone working a minimum wage job is barely able to afford rent demonstrates how being poor and living in a gentrified neighborhood puts those with less economic resources at a major disadvantage. Not only are these people unable to pay their rent, but many of the  non profit organizations that were providing assistance to these poor/low-income families have been forced to shut down as well because they can no longer afford to pay the cities increased rent (Hudson, 2014). As a result, there is a shift in the demographics of these neighborhoods which further illustrates how gentrification disproportionately benefits wealthier new arrivals while making life worse for the poor population that was already struggling to make a living. Furthermore, they are being forced out of the cities and further away from the resources that may be necessary for their overall well-being. 
      In addition to the more organic types of changes in housing and neighborhoods that come with gentrification, there is also a governmental component that does nothing to protect the poor from being unfairly targeted. The Ellis Act, which allows landlords to evict tenants in order to sell the property, has had a huge impact on housing for low-income people. While eviction by the Ellis Act does not allow for landlords to evict tenants in order to charge rent at higher prices, often times, landlords evict the tenants and sell shares to people who can afford to own their own home. In 2013 eviction by Ellis Act "increased by 175% compared to the year before" (Hudson 2014). While landlords evicting tenants via the Ellis act is technically legal, it still puts the poor at a disadvantage because the only reason they are being evicted is because they cannot afford to pay higher rent prices. These people also often do not understand their rights nor do they have the money to take legal action in the event that they feel they are being wrongly evicted. Another disadvantage is that usually the judges who oversee these trials are property owners and landlords themselves, which causes them to be more biased and understanding of the landlord's reasons for evicting low-income tenants. In the case of the Ellis Act, economic capital comes into play because these low-income poor tenants do not have the economic resources to fight against landlords that they feel are only evicting them through the Ellis Act because these higher income tech workers are able to pay more for the property. Similarly, they are not able to actually buy the property that they may have lived on for years because they simply just do not have the money.
      Overall, the example of San Francisco provides evidence of economic capital especially in areas of gentrification because it demonstrates how the poor are unable to compete with the new arrivals for property, thus they must leave the city. Unfortunately, this usually means that they move to another poor community and sometimes end up with worse living situations because; they are so far from the resources that they once relied on. 

Chicago, Illinois  -  Gentrification Effects on Social Networks
      By official standards, Chicago has 77 designated community areas (City of Chicago 2010). In reality, however, the city is made up of over 200 distinct and constantly evolving neighborhoods. Though neighborhoods in present day often play positive roles in building and fostering communities, it is important to recognize Chicago's controversial history of residential segregation, which disproportionately affects minorities and the poor.  Neighborhood formation has the paradoxical ability to bring people together as well as keep people apart. Practices such as exclusionary zoning, discriminatory housing policies, and lack of affordable housing capitalize on the power imbalance between the rich or politically influential and the poor, working-class communities in Chicago (Seitles 1996). 
      One practice that preyed on this particular vulnerability was redlining. Redlining, otherwise known as urban disinvestment, is the discriminatory practice of denying certain neighborhoods access to vital resources such as banking, health care, or jobs (Squires 2003). This practice directly causes the lowering of property values and subsequent resident abandonment and out-movement. Essentially the process of taking capital out of a neighborhood, redlining is an intentional ‘disinvestment', which directly incentivizes the outflow of a population. Redlining is integral to the Chicago gentrification process because it clears out a community and primes the neighborhood for the influx of gentrifiers.
      As stated previously, gentrification is a two part process comprised of the displacement of a low-income community followed by its replacement with a new, wealthier community. Here, I will examine the case of a specific neighborhood, West Town, in order to illustrate the ways that redlining directly contributed to the displacement of the primarily working class community and worked to usher in a new, wealthier middle class. In the 1960s through the late 1970s, redlining prevented current or prospective home owners from obtaining a mortgage, home insurance, or home loans (Betancur 2002). This directly caused a housing slump; not only were prospective residents unable to finance a new home, current residents were also unable to sell their homes at full value. This meant that the housing market was simultaneously illiquid and unprofitable, so residents were motivated to resort to different tactics to move out. One way this manifested was in residents committing "fires of suspicious origin", or intentional arson of a resident's own property in order to extricate the insurance money (UIC 2001). This was often more profitable than attempting to sell the property itself. During the three-year period from 1976-1978, there were over 300 incidents of fires of suspicious origin in the 32-block radius of West Town (Leroux and Worthington 1978). In a survey conducted at the end of this time period, there were found to be 245 empty lots and 42 burnt out buildings in West Town (Ibid). For these reasons and more, over time, West Town became a highly undesirable neighborhood to live in.
      Soon following the out movement from West Town was the influx of wealthier, middle class people into the neighborhood. The uptick in reforms to state-level housing policy in the late 1970s, in response to the destructive impact redlining made to the local housing markets, undid many of the barriers to home ownership redlining put in place and suddenly made previously undesirable properties wildly inexpensive (Betancur 2002). This motivated a new influx of "urban pioneers" - middle class people who sought to invest in the cheap but architecturally significant properties in West Town in order to "flip" them, or refurbish and sell them for a profit. At the same time, the inexpensive properties attracted artists and students involved in the burgeoning art movement in Chicago. These factors all increased the observed cultural and economic value of the area, which attracted brokers, speculators, and commercial landlords. This effect was clearly observed in the housing market; between 1980 and 1990, the median single family home value in West Town increased by 211%  (UIC 2001). By 1990, gentrification covered more than a quarter of all local properties, and has been increasing to date (Ibid).
      In just a few years, the makeup of West Town residents has been drastically altered by the processes of redlining and gentrification. The middle class ultimately emerges at the end of these processes as the adventurous "urban pioneer" refurbishing and renewing West Town - but at what cost? The displacement of community inherent to gentrification directly causes the segmentation of social networks and the devaluation of social capital for those who are displaced. Ultimately, redlining causes more than simple resident out movement; on a broader scale, it changes the incentives to stay or leave a community area. Redlining makes it so that there is more to gain from moving out than staying, and thus directly contributes to the breakdown of social ties. Social connections are integral to the power members of a community hold within the community itself; Bourdieu makes the apt description of forming social ties as a way of ‘earning credit' within a group (Bourdieu 1985). This ‘credit' gives members of a group access to that group's resources. Furthermore, social capital has value on a larger scale because it grants communities the ability to organize and mobilize within society at large. Communities with strong ties have a stronger voice. For these reasons, social ties have real value in the form of social capital. The way that redlining breaks down the social ties within a community directly and powerfully impacts a community's social capital and diminishes access to previously available social resources.
      Gentrification, in the form of an influx of wealthier residents, simultaneously establishes a new community for the entering people but also, largely through increasing housing costs, perpetuates the cycle of displacement of the previous community members. Economically, as was the case in San Francisco, the increased property values due to gentrification make it more difficult for the previous, less wealthy residents to remain in the gentrified neighborhood. Furthermore, the new, middle-class residents bring with them a different shared set of cultural values, otherwise known as habitus, which greatly affects the value of cultural capital within a neighborhood. We will touch on this idea more in the next section on Boston, but a good example of the divisive nature of this cultural shift in West Town was the preference of gentrifiers to send their children to local private schools rather than place them in the public school system, which created two distinct social groups based on educational access (Betancur 2002). Gentrification ultimately creates a new community of gentrifiers united by their shared economic and cultural capital, which tends to displace the previous residents and works to further weaken the previously existing social ties.
      It is important to note that gentrification is ultimately about power, not about land. Those affected most by gentrification are affected not because they have less ownership over their property, but rather because they have less power with which to defend their residential rights. Redlining and gentrification are only possible when a population's rights are vulnerable to exploitation. In that regard, capital, specifically social capital, is an invaluable resource because it is a form of power. Social networks and social ties may not convert directly into economic or political power, but are integral to giving a community a voice, access to resources, and moral worth. By breaking down social ties, gentrification and practices that allow for gentrification, such as redlining, perpetuate a cycle of exploiting the vulnerabilities of the poor and ultimately result in the disempowerment of communities. 

Boston, Massachusetts  -  When Cultural Capital Disrupts Culture 
	Boston, Massachusetts has long been regarded as a center of higher education. Home to over 50 universities, it has been voted the smartest city, the best city for students in the United States, the most innovative city, and "America's College Town" ("Smartest Cities", para. 1; "Best Student Cities", para. 1; Kirsner, 2010; Banner, para. 1). Boston is an admirable "city upon a hill" for many reasons, but there is another, more alarming category in which Boston is the leader (Winthrop, 1630). Boston has been determined the most gentrified city in the United States (Florida, 2013, para. 5). These two inverse points of distinction are not coincidental. Rather, they are inextricably linked to one another in such a way that has actually driven the city of Boston into an affordable housing crisis (O'Brien, 2014, para. 1). Boston is a city in which the concentration of elite institutions has been the catalyst for inordinate levels of gentrification. 
	Boston's rich history has made it a prime location for gentrification. Beginning in the seventeenth century when the Puritans founded Harvard University as the first elite institution in the United States, it was known as a center for education. But the wealth of colleges that has come to distinguish Boston's present were not quite so prevalent to its past. Boston was home to an elite class of "brahmins," who controlled the city's famous mercantile and textile industries. During the mid-nineteenth century, Boston became a hub of industrialism. The influx of Irish and Italian immigrants, combined with a growth in industrial technology, fueled a lucrative factory-based economy (O'Connor, 1995, pg. 92).  This industrious period in the late nineteenth century prompted Boston to annex new neighborhoods, such as East Boston, Roxbury, Dorchester, and Charleston. Over time, the Boston blue-collar worker became an archetype for the city. 
	Although the nineteenth century produced a predominantly working-class city, Boston found itself at a pivotal point after the two World Wars. The factory industry had plateaued and was beginning to decline. Simultaneously, the importance of education was on the rise, which made Boston a prime prospect for urban renewal. "In the half-century after World War II, higher education in the United States triumphed. Few industries grew as fast, gained as much prestige, or affected the lives of so many people" (Lazerson, pg. 65). As a city that had already established itself as a mecca of secondary education, Boston benefited from this shift in cultural values, and city officials began a policy of urban renewal, facilitated by the Boston Redevelopment Authority (Boston redevelopment authority, 2014). The exceptional public transportation system, along with the considerable transportation improvements that took place during the Big Dig, have contributed to Boston's status as the leading city in gentrification. Richard Florida writes, "A rather clear portrait of a gentrifying city emerges from this analysis: a large, dense, affluent, high human capital, knowledge and innovation-based metro that is well served by transit" (Florida, 2013, para. 20). According to this framework, Boston has all the makings of a successful gentrifying city; dense neighborhoods, high human capital as a result of nearby universities, and one of the best mass transportation systems in the country. 
	So what is the state of Boston today?  61% of Boston's low-price areas have gentrified from 2000 to 2007, making it the most gentrified among major U.S. cities (Izzo, 2013).  In considerable contrast to its blue-collar roots, Boston is now made up of only 14.9 percent working class, compared to the national average of 20.5 percent (Florida, 2013). Thus, Boston is now a city of two predominant antithetical classes; the creative class and the service class. The creative class that I refer to is comprised of a variety of people who pursue creative occupations. They are researchers, lawyers, architects, designers, journalists, or artists (Florida, 2013). In Boston, they are the hundreds of thousands of undergraduate and graduate students who live in the city and stay here after graduation. They seek relatively inexpensive housing, which developers capitalize upon, at the expense of the service class. In other words, the growth of higher education in the United States, and thus of graduates in the Boston area has led to a process of ongoing gentrification in the city. The diagram to the left highlights neighborhoods that are dominated by a particular class. Evidently, the working class majority is missing from Boston, replaced by either service or creative class neighborhoods. The exodus of working class people is not the primary concern of today's population, however. Rather, the concern lies with service class people who live in neighborhoods vulnerable to gentrification. 
	The story of gentrification in Boston is inextricably linked to the fact that it is a hub of cultural capital, specifically in the form of educational institutions. Cultural capital refers to the knowledge and habits that are inherent to a particular class, community, or social group. Although it is manifested in three different forms (embodied, objectified, or institutionalized states), we will primarily discuss institutionalized cultural capital (Bourdieu, 1985). In Boston, "America's College Town," institutionalized cultural capital in the form of universities and colleges is the catalyst for many other social processes, including but not limited to gentrification. Quite frankly, the fact that Boston is home to so many institutions that act as a gateway to the upper class has led to an overall process of gentrification throughout the city. In other words, the presence of cultural capital pressure-cookers (i.e. universities) means that the upper class population in Boston is continually growing. 
	The process of gentrification, like many social processes, has winners and losers. Unfortunately, members of lower classes (specifically the ones who live in gentrifying neighborhoods)  are seldom the winners in the game that is gentrification. In fact, the gentrifying process has gone on so long in the city that Boston is currently facing a severe housing affordability crisis. Recently, a group from Northeastern University released a Housing Report Card that stated, "during the last eight years, the cost of living in Greater Boston has increased twice as fast as the median household income of homeowners and three times faster than the median household income of renters" (Bluestone et. al, 2013, pg. 25).  In other words, the renters in Boston are the ones who are coming out on the bottom during all this development. Their wages do not match the rising rental costs.  Despite the fact that the expected proportion of income to go towards housing should not exceed 30 percent, more than a quarter of Boston residents are spending more than 50 percent of their income on rent and related expenses. The consequences of this disproportionality are grave. The process of gentrification in Boston, which is a direct result of the presence of so many universities, has led to a housing affordability crisis. 

Conclusion
	After looking at the narratives of these three cities, we found that the implications of gentrification are very serious. The process of urban renewal has profound ripple effects that highlight the vulnerabilities experienced by the poor through gentrification. We approached our research through the various lenses of capital, which illustrated the way in which a lack of each kind of capital also works to keep the poor at a disadvantage. Furthermore, housing plays an integral role in the kinds of vulnerabilities that the poor face. The location in which people live impacts the kind of food they have access to, the kinds of school they go to, the jobs they work, and the kind of things that they are exposed to. Key findings are that gentrification disproportionately advantages the gentrifiers while keeping the poor at a disadvantage. Thus, in order to limit the vulnerabilities experienced by the poor, the government should seek to balance the benefits of gentrification across all classes. As we said before, gentrification is ultimately about power, and it is fueled by an imbalance of power across socioeconomic classes, which allows the negative effects of gentrification to be disproportionately felt by lower-income people. Therefore, it is the responsibility of government to mitigate this power imbalance, so that the benefits of gentrification can be felt by all, rather than by a select few. 
