We often say, “Live at the moment!”  Once the moment passes, it is lost and will not come back. It is a simple, one-direction path. But do we really live linearly from the perspective of time?  Is there any chance we can live in multiple moments simultaneously? With some help and triggers, can linear time sometimes burst into a multiple-dimension world with pieces of our past? Can a class reunion after thirty years be that special trigger?

Nine months ago, I received an email for my “30th year reunion” from my college. I stared it in disbelief.  Had it been thirty years already? I forget who said if your life lacks outside stimulation, your mental age will remain at your most socially active time. Is that the reason why I still feel I am in my thirties? I could probably have sat there and marveled for hours at the idea of thirty years passing in the blink of an eye. This was, however, my first reunion invitation.  After leaving Taiwan at the age of twenty one, I missed my siblings’ weddings, the birthday celebrations of their kids, and any big milestone ceremony held in Taiwan.  I was not going to miss this one. Right there, without any hesitation, I answered, Yes – Attending.

The reunion is set for June 7th. It is still far away; I thought I could return to my linear life. For all the years, my life seems to be going in one direction only.  When I was a student in Taiwan, the goal was always to pass the tough entrance exams, from middle school to high school, then from high school to college, with acceptance rates of less than ten percent. In college, the linear life seemed to take a temporary detour, stuck on hopelessly dreamy young love and in the vanity of club social life. But the eagerness of growing up and the restless desire of embracing a bigger world never ceased. The pull to that linearly direction is too strong.  My upbringing re-enforced the linear direction once I gained the responsibility of raising two kids of my own.

Now the reunion is coming, and it is coming in the internet age of social media.

Shortly after the initial email invitation, a closed Facebook group was created.  The reunion was like a seed, growing as fast as weeds nurtured by our own expectations and retrospection. Pictures of the old campus and old classmates were popping out, reminding us of the moments of our youth.  The long lost friends were also found one by one via different techniques. Even with the power of social networks and Google, this is actually not an easy task: first, you needed to know if he/she still used a Chinese name and stayed in Taiwan or if he/she moved to a different county, say the United States, and switched to an English spelling of his or her name. I believe we leave a piece of ourselves in every friend we had in life. Finding a long lost friend was like finding a piece of you.

Through the college reunion Facebook group, I found a friend from middle school — that is, a friend from about forty years ago, and then through her profile, I found more familiar names. Within twenty-four hours, I was reconnected to sixteen friends from middle school and high school! In Taiwan, my middle school and high school were for girls only. Some of them had been looking for me, too. The academic pressure and competition, the pulling force of the linear life during those phases had long gone. What was left was the pure joy of finding someone with whom I shared the struggles of teenage life.  With thirty years gone, we gained wisdom along with ages. No one talked about superficial things. We did not use kids or husbands or careers as a reference point for comparison. But how do I tell them about all the journeys I had in the past thirty years. All the memories rushed back. How could I be a linear being? How could I just live in a moment when I can command all the memories and values I had in the past?  I have walked a long way from being a high school girl who solely enjoyed mathematics and stories, but the energetic part of me still lives with me.   I still regret I did not spend enough time studying in college, but that young college girl who had the confidence that the world is hers is still here. I wish I knew my high school and college classmates better, but I am here now. In many ways, I am still the same girl I was thirty years ago with a big appetite on life, but I am also wiser and kinder now.

June 7th is still a few month away. Some of my old friends already told me they are not going to attend a huge gathering with more than five hundred people, but I am going to spend time with them outside the reunion. Some of my friends who I miss the most are still missing. I am not sure if the real reunion will remind me of the lost years or if it will be a pure celebration of the gains.  To me, the reunion is happening right now. I am revisiting my past self through every interaction I have with my old friends and through every photo they post. The reunion as a seed has grown to let me see myself in new light and it is not linear.