In 1933, my father was kidnapped and held for ransom when he was three years old. After he was safely returned, everyone said he was the luckiest boy and would be blessed for the rest of his life. My great grandma used that as a pass and spoiled him to no end. No one could discipline him even when his behavior was so out of control he would flip tables in local restaurants. As the oldest son in the traditional Chinese family, his older brother had started taking on the responsibility of running the family business. Nobody knows when and how, but at one point my father realized if he did not do something different, he would live the rest of his life as a wealthy landlord’s spoiled younger brother. He decided to choose his own fate and the opportunity soon presented itself.  China was at war with Japan and under the shadow of a bigger civil war. There were recruiting activities at a close-by town for Chiang Kai-Shek’s army. My father then lied about his age and joined the army; he was only fourteen at that time.

In the beginning his sergeant disparaged him for he was weak and always fell behind during marches. But my father did not quit and return to his wealthy family. Two years later, he became a captain in charge of radio communication for the platoon.  After Mao’s Communist army took an upper hand in the civil war, my father went back to his hometown to see his family before his unit retreated and headed to southern China. One of the villagers asked him to take his nine year old son to Taiwan. So, a teenager brought a pre-teen boy 2000 miles through war from Henan, which is a province the Yellow River runs through, to Hainan Island in the South China Sea, then to Taiwan. During the long journey, they often ate dirt mixed with rain water hoping it would fool their empty stomach. During the boat ride to Taiwan they became so seasick they lay motionless under the deck without knowing that by doing so they had avoided a riot from a mob that murdered most of the people who first disembarked. Historians say at least six million people died from 1945 to 1949 because of the civil war.

All these hardships were recounted by my uncle Tsui who was that nine year-old boy my father brought to Taiwan in 1949. My father supported him until he graduated from college. As for my father, he did not want to tell me anything about any terror of the war to protect me from those horrors.  He also hardly mentioned anything about China or his family there. The government of Taiwan had laws that forbade people to contact any residences in China. The “Three Links”: post, transport, and trade, was officially restored only on December 15th, 2008. McCarthyism was heavily practiced at Taiwan for many decades from the 1940s until the 1990s.  Anything about his life in China was sealed as if in a treasure box, so precious that he did not want to risk touching it. But as long as he spotted the word “Henan” on the bulletin board of any small restaurants, he would stop and purchased some specialty from that store, as if just the word “Henan” could ease his homesickness. I know he had never stopped missing his family in China. Every Lunar New Year Eve, my father took the traditional ceremony of honoring our ancestors seriously and I remember seeing his red and teary eyes.

He did tell us everything that happened after he came to Taiwan. He knew a military career was not for him, and so he studied really hard, entered school and learned Russian and English. He liked to keep emphasizing how hard he studied and how feverishly he listened to English broadcasts to perfect his accent.  During the school’s English speech competition, my father delivered the best speech and earned a standing ovation from the crowd, but only received 2nd place because the school did not want to give 1st place to a student from the Russian class.  After he met my mother, he knew he had met the woman he wanted to marry. In Taiwan, no one wanted their daughter to marry a penniless soldier whose home was a thousand miles away under Communist rule. My father never gave up or lost hope.  After eight years, my grandparents finally gave them their approval and my parents were married.

How did one survive a civil war that had more than six millions casualties as a nineteen year-old? How did one earn enough respect to become the general manager of an international company in Taiwan without any family connections? For my father, I believe it was his optimism and kindness that helped him through the worst experiences of humanity and his hard work that led him to success. My father was five feet eight inches, very handsome and full of charisma. When I was a kid, I thought he was like Fred Flintstone in the Flintstones cartoons I watched, a very dear and loving person. In his forties, he put on some extra weights from the endless business meals. He was like a Me Le Buddha – not only did he have a round belly and a kind smile on his face, but a big heart as well. There were always a lot of visitors when father was home. He loved friends and never hesitated to help them.  I think that is why his friends did not mind his endless bragging about his wife and his kids.  Most of all, his joy with having people around him was so genuine. If I learned a new piano song, he would tell his friends as if I just performed a sold-out solo concert at Carnegie Hall.  When he came back from his business trip, he would tell me the train played the song Fur Elise, but “I think yours is better!” And I know, even during his business trip, we were on his thoughts all the time.

It is like he condensed all his lost time and lost opportunities together and focused only on his family. He never let a day go by without letting us feel how much he loved us and how much he treasured us. I never know if he had any regrets because when I was with him, he just enjoyed the time he had with me. He paid more interests to me than anything else and I was too young to be curious about my father.  My father died in 1981 at the age of fifty-one. In the end, he was totally consumed by cancer. There were only certain foods that he could eat without throwing up;  watermelon was one of them. One day I sat with him and watched him slowly eating a small slice of watermelon. He nibbled slowly because he was very weak, but his face was filled with joy, as if he was eating the most delicious food in the world. I had to fight back tears, but I did not want to move my eyes away. If I could have only one image remain in my memory, that is the image I want to cherish forever. Nothing else could teach me about humanity more than that moment. At the end, a person’s wish could be so insignificant. He let us know so clearly he was the luckiest man in the world because of us. And I never had the chance to tell him that I am the luckiest girl because I had him.