Joe Sapia, who has been a journalist for the Asbury Park Press for thirty four years, is teaching the spring 2014 Princeton adult writing class.  Mr. Sapia grew up in Central Jersey and currently lives in Monroe, which is about thirty minutes away from the Princeton Adult School. Mr. Sapia has spent most of his life in New Jersey. He enjoys hiking and is enthusiastic about preserving the local wild land. He has written hiking guides and has been a contributor for many local magazines and a newsletter for other wildlife enthusiasts.

Mr. Sapia described himself as passionate, stubborn, and loyal when he interviewed with his writing class students on March 27th, 2014. Even though he has only been teaching the class for five weeks, all three traits can be observed by the students in the class. First, Mr. Sapia is passionate in his belief that to be a good writer, one has to start writing. “Grammar, Topic, and Actual Writing,” he said in the first class and repeated in the following classes. Among the three things, he placed the grammar first to emphasize the importance of expressing oneself clearly and correctly. He reviewed many common grammar mistakes in class and gave students freedom to write on their own topics. With his journalistic background, he also likes to see his students quote their sources and cover the “who, what, when, where, why and how” questions. He asked his students to write in a “Hemingway style, but not William Faulkner style”. Ann, one of the students who attended the first day of class, was a Faulkner fan. She disagreed with the implication that Hemingway was a better writer than Faulkner and asked “maybe this is not the right class for me?”

Despite sensing the risk of losing some students, Mr. Sapia did not back down. He wanted to strike home the importance of keeping the sentence short and simple on writing and jokingly concluded “If you can write like Faulkner, then there is no need to come to the writing class.”  Yes, he did say he is stubborn. Jane Lee, a mother of three kids from Plainsboro, attended the first class, but decided to drop because of the emphasis on grammar which was very different from her idea of a writing class. Pei, another Asian woman, was also a bit uncomfortable because Mr. Sapia singled out ESL students in the first two classes. But she figured out she could use help with her grammar. Most important, like the rest of her classmates, she agreed with Mr. Sapia that the best way to be good at writing is to write.

Recently Mr. Sapia told his class, “I am having a blast with the class and I want the same for you.”  Everyone in his class feels this sincerity from Mr. Sapia.  He always arrives early before the class starts and follows up on topics discussed in class with more resources via emails. Nancy Sun said, “He likes to help people.” Laurel Harvey said, “He tired his butt out.”  Laurel also pointed out the she “Loves the fact he is so real with this diverse group.” Mr. Sapia’s willingness to help is not limited to correcting grammar; he also makes efforts to understand the background behind the writing. For example, Jim wrote about something from his Irish background and Mr. Sapia would try to understand the specific foreign terms in Jim’s essay.  Mr. Sapia said, “I am more of a giver, not a taker.” It is his way to show his loyal nature.

Mr. Sapia showed his students his first paper that filled with red ink and a failed grade as an example that anyone could improve to become a writer. He is not afraid of showing his vulnerability. After the class interviewed Mr. Sapia, many students were touched by his sensitivity and emotional reflections about his mother, his attachment to nature, and his enjoyment of producing hand-made folk art Christmas cards. Gary commented “There were two sides of Hemingway, a manly side and a sensitive side. And Joe is just like Hemingway.” Mr. Sapia talked about his cat, the birds which came to the bird feeders around his house, and the snakes that he sees in the woods.  The cat and birds are Ployal companions and the snakes remind him of nature.  That is Mr. Sapia: a homey and loyal friend, a true lover of nature, and a person who shares what he has with the people around him.