What makes a place home?

When I came to United States for graduate school, I did not picture myself staying for long. I wanted to experience a different world, but I also wanted to go home to all the people whom I cared. Home to me is the house where my mother lives.  Of course, life never follows any play book. In 1996 I found myself with a job I enjoyed very much and most importantly, I had a family of my own.

The rental condominium was too small for my two young kids. Even with the uncertainties about how long I would stay in the United States as a single parent, I decided to buy a house. Carpe diem! I had to make the best out of this situation so this young family of mine would not become dysfunctional. I wanted my kids to have a yard in which to run around, trees on which to carve their names, and plenty of room for their play date.  I found a little house just like that. It was like love at the first sight. The house was a split-level ranch situated on a wooded lot with beautiful landscaping. It had an open living room with a cozy fireplace and a bright, spacy kitchen. Most of all, it came with a large in-ground swimming pool. Having a pool was a little bit tricky; I needed to convince myself to overcome the fear of any accidents involving my two young kids. But the oversized deck was very inviting; the desire of having some beautiful memories outshined the fears. I became the owner of a house with a pool, and I made it my home.

The first thing I did was install a pool cover, so secure even an elephant could stand on top of it, and, then, I sent both kids to learn to swim. The house brought us so much happiness. We made a lot of cookies in the kitchen, with both kids often eating the chocolate out of the mixing bowl or biting the bar of butter straight out of the wrapper. They swam together in the pool and played games invented by my daughter, who even claimed, one day, she would be a swimmer who competed in the Olympics. We learned how to mulch and took care of the garden. We scooped dead little mice and chipmunk, along with the leaves, out from the pool and grew a deeper appreciation for the chemicals and filters that maintained the water.  Both kids participated in a lot of community activities. One day, I went to watch my son’s Little League baseball game: he was pitching and I heard the other parents chanting his name loudly! I was overwhelmed. They knew him, they all knew him and were rooting for him!

Eight years went by quickly in Lincroft.  After my daughter finished her first semester at the middle school, she realized the school was not challenging enough and agreed to move. So, we sold the house and bought another house in Holmdel for a much more competitive school system.  The house at Holmdel was a Colonial-style building on a larger lot because of the municipal zoning rules.  The previous owner, who was also the first owner of the property, bought 100 seedlings of pine trees of different varieties and planted them around the property many years ago. Then he planted hundreds of rhododendrons underneath those pine trees.  Most of the rhododendrons are more than nine feet tall. Together with the pine trees, they formed a beautiful barrier more than twelve-feet-wide around the 1.1-acre land.  People always parked their cars on the side street, stopped and took pictures of those flowers in the spring. Both kids made new friends quickly. They embraced the busy and challenging school work. They also picked up the most popular sports in Holmdel, cross country and tennis, instead of continuing their old sports, karate and baseball.  If they missed the old house, they did not complain much. But, from time to time, my son would go to the backyard and play one-man baseball by himself: tossing the ball high then hitting the ball into the far end of the yard. He was a popular kid and got elected as his class president in Holmdel.  I think the one-man baseball was his way to cherish his old team. At this house, they were no longer the kids that sat on my lap or the kids with shaky baby teeth or ear infections who wanted me to cuddle them in the rocking chair.  They were the teenagers who just got their driver licenses and I was the mother who stood at the garage door watching the car’s tail-lights disappearing, while holding my worries so I did not become an overly nagging mother.

Last year, after another eight years of living in Holmdel, my son started college. I sold the house and moved again.  This time, the move was for me. After the moving company loaded all the furniture and boxes, I looked at the empty shelves, empty floors, and empty rooms.  It was hard to believe there were so many memories triggered by those spaces.  And, now, they were there quietly waiting for the next owners to create their own memories. “Where is home?” is easy but “what is home?” is harder. I, then, remembered a dream I had many years ago, while I still lived in Lincroft. In the dream: A violent tornado destroyed the house. I looked out from my bedroom window and saw the deck covered by the up-rooted trees.  I panicked and looked for my kids. There they were, right beside me, and I was relieved and calm.  Then, I woke up.  At that time, my company had just executed one of its biggest outsourcing deals. My entire department, my manager, my colleagues, and most of my team all went to another company, but I was retained to work on a special project. I knew the dream told me that my team at work was also my home, and it was destroyed by forces out of my control. But the dream also let me realize that all I care about are my kids. Homes can be destroyed and rebuilt as long as I have the people I love with me.