well between hum and film, hum is more important.
film is only worth it if you want to become an artist.
hum doesn't require a practical element to be justified.
no.
again, not unless you plan on becoming a filmmaker.
you shouldn't be thinking about this indulgence.
when a) you don't have an internship.
b) even worse - you don't have any real aspirations.
i'm just saying that i have a cushy enough life right now but it really sucks feeling like i'm not making an impact on society.
the nice feeling of having a good job with good money lasts for like a month before you feel empty - unless you're really into consumerism.
which i hope you won't become.
you need to aim a lot higher now.
or you'll end up like everyone else.
and not even know it.
you need to develop a solid expertise in cos.
not just knowing a bunch of coding languages.
but an actual passion about something technology can do.
otherwise you're just going to be 1 in a bajillion kevin hsu/ritchie iu's out there.
i wish you felt as passionate about cos as you do about film/east asian hum.
and maybe you don't bc you haven't really dived into it yet - in which case, you really should.
so start with you are not a gadget so you can start thinking about problems.
and about being socially responsible.
and you still have enough time to learn the skills you need to make an impact.
if you don't waste your next two years at princeton.
See if there are any research projects you can join during the summer.
that's probably a lot better than working at pretty much any corporation.
since you're just going to be an intern anyway.
Sam was always extremely interested in AI.
and he tried to learn as much as he could while in college.
then he worked for a spam fighting company that allowed him to learn more about machine learning.
in a practical setting.
and now he's working at google, where I'm sure he can pursue AI to the fullest degree he can imagine.
you have to start with learning though, instead of just applying to the companies with the biggest names and the biggest intern paychecks.
So search for interesting projects over corporate ones.
gifure out a topic you're interested in, then email professors to see if they know of any way you can learn more over the summer - offer your labor.
.
