Navid Ashari
Journal Entry 1
Topic: "If you could shout any one sentence and have the whole world hear it, what sentence would it be?  Why?"

      Since grade school “The Golden Rule” has been taught to most, if not all, of us: “treat others as you would like to be treated and don’t treat others in ways you wouldn’t want to be treated”.  When I first came into contact with this concept as a young boy I didn’t give it much attention and grouped it together with all the other rules of the classroom: follow directions, raise your hands to speak, ask before going to the restroom, etc. It was not until later when I realized the great power in this simple philosophy.
      If everyone followed this rule, the world would be a much nicer place to live in, at least on an individual level. Of course there would still be plenty of disagreements, as the peoples of our world obviously don’t all have similar values and philosophies, and there would no doubt be the same issues on larger scales like in politics and religion, with thousands dying in war every year over some of these issues. Nevertheless, day-to-day life would be much more pleasant.
      Now you might say that simply shouting the Golden Rule out won’t make everyone take it to heart, but if I really could shout out a sentence so loudly the entire world would hear it, I’m sure a good proportion of people would at least give the rule some thought. The human population is huge, and even influencing a small proportion of these billions would have a tremendous impact. 
      Countless petty disputes everyday would be avoided. The masses being more outwardly thoughtful and caring would certainly spark friendships between people who, in our world today, where many of us are apathetic to the feelings of others, would never think to befriend each other. Such small steps would work to make the world a generally happier place and who knows what such an environment could do on a larger scale. Maybe slowly, over time, there would be grand changes to the world as a whole.
