I am not a winter enthusiast.  This is not because I cannot appreciate the peace of wintery moments, or because I do not enjoy the pure labor of snow shoveling. From time to time I do long for the moment of stillness when everything takes hold. This kind of still moment is only possible in winter. I know only the reservation under the harsh bitter cold brings out the gentle contents with every tiny little sign of spring. But I am still not a big supporter of winter.

I am not an enthusiast because I see the suffering in winter, the suffering and the death brought upon my plants from winter.

I am from Taiwan, which is a subtropical island. A lot of my childhood memories are linked with smells from those tropical flowers that blossom all year round.  If I close my eyes, I can still smell the flowers we called "fragrance at night."  They grow freely in a dense form so many people plant them as a fence along the road.  The shortcut from our house to the movie theater was guarded by those bushes.   My parents often took the whole family out on weekends to the movies, walking home at night, talking excitedly about the plots while the dark air filled with the sweet honey fragrance. This is one of my happiest memories.  Then there is the flower we called "seven miles fragrance" – named because you can smell the delightful fragrance from this flower even if you are far away.  Every time there is a field trip or hike to some small mountain in the wild, you can sense the existence of the flowers because the smell is there. But the fragrance comes quietly, it does not come out in any aggressive way, but it's there to freshen you up. Even when you think the smell is gone, just wait a bit, and it will come back again, and maybe even stronger. It brings my friends and me so much joy when we actually spot one of the seven-mile-fragrance plants in real physical form.

When my kids started bringing me small pots of daffodil or tulips from their elementary school as my Mother's Day gift, I realized they could grow up without any bodily experience of immersing in a fragrance, without knowing those beautiful "Night's fragrance" or "Seven Miles's fragrance."  Something had to change, and I become a container gardener, and to be more precise, a tropical plant container gardener.

The most valuable container plant is a flower called "Blue Sky."  In the 1970s, Taiwan sent out a lot of agriculture experts to counties in Africa and South Asia to help them to increase their rice production as a way to secure international relationships. One of the experts, Dr. Xie, is my father's best friend, and we all called him Uncle. His wife was stranded in mainland China, and Uncle Xie devoted himself to agriculture. I had never seen anyone else earned as much respect as he did.  One day he came to our house for dinner and handed a bare-root plant to my mom, saying it's a beautiful flower he got from Indonesia.  We planted it in the front of the house. What a vicious grower! It climbed up and covered the entire 3-story building quickly.  It had clusters of trailing flowers that took your breath away. I was a teenager at that time. When I opened my eyes in the morning, the entire window were covered by many long strings of the blue/purple flowers. That was when I realized why it is called "Blue Sky". My mom, as an artist, was also taken aback by its beauty and made a couple of Chinese water ink paintings about the flowers.

Just like summer, not all the good things stay forever. The "Blue Sky" plant was gone first when I went to college; my mom said it attracted too many ants. Then my father passed away with cancer. Two years later, I found myself standing in front of the hospital bed of Uncle Xie. He died soon after. When I left Taiwan to United States for graduate school, I brought one of the Blue Sky paintings from my mother with me. A few years later, the painting got stolen from my office.  I did not tell mother. How could I?

Then one year, I found a tropical flower catalog at my friend's house. There it is, the "Blue Sky". I still remember the disbelief and the excitement.  After so many years, I finally have the "Blue Sky" back in my hand, not just a dream or a memory.

Now you know why I have such a big problem with winters. Over the years, I have become a sunlight-chasing gardener, moving the pots in and out just to hope to put one more day of summer on them. Of course, the fight against the trend of temperature proves to be futile and many plants die from the sudden drop of temperature at night. The survivors always look miserable under the dry heat during the long winter months. Despite its beauty, I could never open my arms to welcome a season that brings the miseries to my plants.

My "Blue Sky" will never grow over one-story tall in this pathetic container, not to mention to cover the sky in blue; the fragrance from the plants of mine will never reach out to the other end of the house, even when it is in blossom.  Sometimes I do not know the things I hold dear to my heart carry any more tangible value anymore. As for my kids, their childhood memories will be so different from mine. I have no idea what color, what smell would one day come back creep into their sense and open up their memory. That will be ok. Because I find myself, just like them, building new memories too. I hear myself telling my friends in Taiwan that I cannot picture myself living at another place now, because I am going to miss snow so much.