How do people recharge or start healing?

To me, coming home always starts the healing process. But when my home is eight thousand miles away, then writing letters to my mother does the remedial trick.

I have been writing letters to my mother for almost thirty-four years, since I left home for college.  Sometime, I write several letters within a single week; sometime, it is one letter for several weeks. But I always write, not just for her, but also for myself.  Even things I have already told her over the phone, I will still put them in my letters to her.  Most of my communication have switched in this digital age, but not these letters.  If my father made me a kinder person, it is the constant communication with my mother that keeps the world in perspective for me. She is my irrigation system and still guides me towards a harvest season.

My mother is a third-generation Hakka Han in Taiwan. My grandparents, as with most Chinese of that era, placed huge value in having a male offspring to carry the family name. For years, my grandparents kept trying to have a baby boy. By the time they finally had a baby boy, they already had seven girls. My mother was the oldest one of this large family. My grandfather failed in all the businesses he tried and bankrupted the family. My mother shouldered a lot of responsibilities, and not only the weight of caring for her young siblings. During World War II, Taiwan was occupied by Japan. My mother was thirteen years old when the Allies started bombing Taiwan; she had to carry several young siblings when running for shelters.  She also had to carry heavy firewood to make meals for the family. All these physical demands took a huge toll on her back and hips years later. Once my mother received her associate's degree, she became the breadwinner for the family as a teacher. She also delayed her pursuit of a bachelor's degree so her younger sister could go to college first. She took all these sacrifices for granted, as it was nothing worth mentioning. She did tell us a story of a costume party she attended as an art  student at the National Normal University. With no money to spare, she just wore an old worn-out jacket from her father and went as Charlie Chaplin.

My mother holds natural leadership and authority. With her hardworking and dedicated nature, there were many career opportunities in administration and management coming her way, but her passion was art. She would rather spend her energy creating paintings through Chinese water-ink and brushes than seeking job advancement.

Since my childhood, she has been an artist, a teacher, and, then, my mother. I was the kid riding on the backseat of her scooter to yet another drawing competition.

My grandparents liked to ask me, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"

I always said I wanted to be an artist. Then they laughed with approval and repeated my answer to my mother. For many years, I always knew that was the "expected answer" from me. It was a way to comfort my grandparents, as if the talent had been carried to the next generation that could offset all the sacrifices she made.

My mother kept studying new developments in art education. Once, I used a black crayon to put all my objects in shape and received a poor grade from my teacher. However, my mother told me it was perfectly fine to express shapes in my way and showed me an article she had just read.  To me, she was the coolest art teacher. She told her students the story of Homer's Odyssey and had them draw images from whatever inspired them in the story. This was forty years ago in Taichung, Taiwan, where very few people were versed in Homer's Odyssey and even fewer had experienced this kind of teaching.  At home we had volumes of art collections and lots of literature to read. With her influence, we all love to go to museums and enjoy art exhibitions. The older I get, the more I am grateful to my upbringing.

The price for having an art teacher as your mother was that you ended up responsible for many arts and craft related school projects, such as decorating classroom, and designing posters for special ceremony events. One Sunday afternoon, none of my classmates showed up to help me on the poster. There was a big exam coming up next day, so, one by one, they all yielded to the pressure of the exam. I stared at the big poster on the floor and got angry and frustrated because I did not know how I could finish it alone. My mom heard me grunting and came over. I was going to create many irregular geometrical shapes across the poster board to make the theme stand out, but just applying glue behind all the tiny papers and sticking them to the poster was going to take hours. My mom then taught me a trick to use a large brush to apply the glue thinly and evenly on the board first and, then, spread the paper on top. Voila! It was completed in minutes, while I thought it would take hours and all my hair.

"You see, there is always a way," she said.

My mother is one with the most wisdom.

The next price of having an artist as your mother took a while to arise.  There were very few career women in Taiwan at the time. Being a popular art teacher in school and still trying to squeeze time to paint, my mother did not treat other house chores with high priority.  In Taiwan, students carried their own lunchboxes to school.  If the lunchbox was prepared the night before and had been refrigerated, it would be sent to a steam room before it came back to us during lunch time. The lunchboxes became a competition arena among stay-at-home mothers.  Some would even prepare it in the morning or just before the lunch time and, then, deliver it with fresh fruit during lunch time. When my classmates opened their lunchboxes, they found colorful and delicious displays. As for my lunchbox, it was always prepared the night before and consisted of a dark-color paste from one easily made dish of soybean and ground pork, day after day, week after week. I felt so embarrassed when opening my lunchbox. After school, before I reached home, I would dump the contents of my lunchbox into a food collector and hoped, by doing so, I would not have to bring the same food back tomorrow. But the next day, my lunchbox would inevitably return the same thing—dark-colored paste. I ended up skipping lunch and ate junk food instead, and became a very chubby teenager,

My mother possessed the typical absent-minded syndrome of an artist. The academic pressure for kids in Taiwan was enormous. By failing just a single subject, a student would need to repeat the grade.  Staying behind one year was considered a disgrace and some even committed suicide if that happened.  Therefore, the two midterms and final exams were a huge deal for all students and their parents. During those exam days, school opened only for half day so there was no need to prepare a lunchbox. While other parents interrupt their daily routine to accommodate the stressful event, my mother would totally forget about it, no matter how many times I reminded her. I would still see a lunchbox prepared, and, yes, with the same soy-bean paste mixed with ground pork.

My mother had a box of seals at her art studio and she stamped her seals on the painting when she finished it. I could just fetch the seal and stamp it on any school paper that required a parents' signature. She never questioned why she had not seen any report cards from me. I often went to a city library with a few friends to study until the library closed. My mother would not know I was not home.  I was dying for attention from her, but she gave me total trust and freedom. More than once I told myself, I would not have kids of my own if I decided to be a career woman.  Now, I am a working, single parent can my kids one day see me fully, and not judge me from one single angle?

In my last year of high school, I became a very difficult person to my mother. I became more critical of her.  I would easily get upset and not speak to her for days.  Then, everything changed once I left home for college.  We were like two porcupines, hurting each other when we were close.  And the distance made our love mature.  I started writing to her frequently and have never stopped.

One day, my mother came to visit me at my college campus. One of my friends pulled out many flattering words and introduced me by my various club titles, one after another.  I was glowing with superficial vanity, but, then, I saw her eyes. She was smiling at me. She was just happy to see me.  She did not care I was the president of this club or vice president of another club.  She was absent-minded again, but, this time, she was occupied with me, just me, without any title.  That has always been the way. She knows me better than I know myself.

Since, my mother has always been by my side. I told her about a crazy-idea move to Shanghai for my career. Her response was that she would go to Shanghai to help me settle down. Later, when I got cold feet and decided not to go to Shanghai, she told me all the good reasons I should not go. I made many decisions in life:  marriage, career, relocation, and, recently, downsizing.  She never let me feel like I made a wrong decision; she just helped me to see all the positive effects of my decisions. Even in my fifties, I sometime feel like the same child staring at a blank poster and, during those times, I still lean on my mother to come over and say, "You know, there is always a way."