Happy birthday Safiyah girl  Suhoor candles and cake, indian dinner in Austin, and put put.
Stumbled across this in a scientific journal...clever joke or serious oversight???
Taking my favorite pretty lady president out for dinner! I love you Mara, and though I probably won't see you at Wellesley any more, I will always be thinking of you. You inspire me every day with your strength, heart, and kindness - it's hard to put into words what a beautiful soul you are! And, of course, your sass and secret potty humor make you truly mara-velous. I can't wait to see the amazing things you will do and the policies you will enact as the future Mme POTUS.
Perfect weekend.
Kate, am only now realizing that we are tagged as the goslings...smart move bussert, smart move.
Come buy clementines at El Table to support Veronica Yu's work with health and wellness NGOs and sustainability projects in Peru!! Each clementine you buy goes toward helping Vron's projects as well as your own personal happiness due to increased amounts of yummy clementines.
Cute lil snug bugs in the #marmon scream tunnel.
The best people in the world (missing mama Micaela Palermo) 
Apply to el table.
Real tears shed....CHANCE THE RAPPER IS COMING TO WELLESLEY.
Emma vs book 
Warm fuzzy love to everyone at 24 hour shakes.
Welcome home Levea Freeman....we love you so!!
Walden walden walden.
A big big THANK YOU to Leigh Morrison for making me my first ever pair of SWANTS! What are swants you ask?? Only a sweater that has been made by fabric magic into PANTS, aka the most comfy and amazing garment I have ever had the privilege of wearing. Why should torsos have the monopoly on sweaters?? DOESN'T MAKE SENSE! Leigh, thank you so much for these bday swants, they are perfect and I expect to wear them till kingdom come. I already miss you so much and hope you have the adventure of a lifetime in Amsterdam!! LOVE YOU LEIGH.
WHO SENT ME A MATTRESS PROTECTOR FROM AMAZON is this some sort of sick joke/suggestion???? I am so confused help me.
Thank you everyone for the best birthday a gal could ask for. 40 aint so bad!
Wonderful first day with the perfect cast of steel magnolias.
Leigh-zard fleece + Lil-zard fleece.
For christmas this year I want a smaller cuter version of me.
Lmaooooo I love this.
Thanks friends.
Summer's good but worse off now knowing I will never be as happy as a cutie pig with a cookie.
OH I love love this lil snug chub.
Snorf snorf snorf.
Thank u very deeply for sharing.
Kem - in Meredith, NH! It was so beautiful! 
Nothing will ever compare. Good try rams.
Our business this week is...batting cages and bumper boats! Love you eboard, love you kimball.
songs about murder = great pumpup songs before econ305 I assume.
Spring week helen! hmu.
AHHHHH this is so great.
Ahh this is too sweet!! Thank you!
I'm the cuter one.
Weds lunch this week elena!
I thought it was the worst prank ever but turns out it was just my forgetfulness getting the best of me...COULDA BEEN WORSE.
You're perfect. Thank you so much for sharing this with me because the second you posted this I was coincidentally on etsy browsing animal anatomy accessories so clearly we are on the same wavelength.
Yes! Emma came in the mail!!
I applied to wellesley because i misread which hillz graduated from here.
I duffed up.
How did you know this is my favorite!?!?!??! who told yo.
