MADISON

To the People of the State of New York:

WHEN the people of America reflect that they are now called upon
to decide a question, which, in its consequences, must prove one of
the most important that ever engaged their attention, the propriety
of their taking a very comprehensive, as well as a very serious,
view of it, will be evident.

Nothing is more certain than the indispensable necessity of
government, and it is equally undeniable, that whenever and however
it is instituted, the people must cede to it some of their natural
rights in order to vest it with requisite powers. It is well worthy
of consideration therefore, whether it would conduce more to the
interest of the people of America that they should, to all general
purposes, be one nation, under one federal government, or that they
should divide themselves into separate confederacies, and give to
the head of each the same kind of powers which they are advised to
place in one national government.

It has until lately been a received and uncontradicted opinion
that the prosperity of the people of America depended on their
continuing firmly united, and the wishes, prayers, and efforts of
our best and wisest citizens have been constantly directed to that
object. But politicians now appear, who insist that this opinion is
erroneous, and that instead of looking for safety and happiness in
union, we ought to seek it in a division of the States into distinct
confederacies or sovereignties. However extraordinary this new
doctrine may appear, it nevertheless has its advocates; and certain
characters who were much opposed to it formerly, are at present of
the number. Whatever may be the arguments or inducements which have
wrought this change in the sentiments and declarations of these
gentlemen, it certainly would not be wise in the people at large to
adopt these new political tenets without being fully convinced that
they are founded in truth and sound policy.

It has often given me pleasure to observe that independent
America was not composed of detached and distant territories, but
that one connected, fertile, widespreading country was the portion
of our western sons of liberty. Providence has in a particular
manner blessed it with a variety of soils and productions, and
watered it with innumerable streams, for the delight and
accommodation of its inhabitants. A succession of navigable waters
forms a kind of chain round its borders, as if to bind it together;
while the most noble rivers in the world, running at convenient
distances, present them with highways for the easy communication of
friendly aids, and the mutual transportation and exchange of their
various commodities.

With equal pleasure I have as often taken notice that Providence
has been pleased to give this one connected country to one united
people--a people descended from the same ancestors, speaking the same
language, professing the same religion, attached to the same
principles of government, very similar in their manners and customs,
and who, by their joint counsels, arms, and efforts, fighting side
by side throughout a long and bloody war, have nobly established
general liberty and independence.

This country and this people seem to have been made for each
other, and it appears as if it was the design of Providence, that an
inheritance so proper and convenient for a band of brethren, united
to each other by the strongest ties, should never be split into a
number of unsocial, jealous, and alien sovereignties.

Similar sentiments have hitherto prevailed among all orders and
denominations of men among us. To all general purposes we have
uniformly been one people each individual citizen everywhere
enjoying the same national rights, privileges, and protection. As a
nation we have made peace and war; as a nation we have vanquished
our common enemies; as a nation we have formed alliances, and made
treaties, and entered into various compacts and conventions with
foreign states.

A strong sense of the value and blessings of union induced the
people, at a very early period, to institute a federal government to
preserve and perpetuate it. They formed it almost as soon as they
had a political existence; nay, at a time when their habitations
were in flames, when many of their citizens were bleeding, and when
the progress of hostility and desolation left little room for those
calm and mature inquiries and reflections which must ever precede
the formation of a wise and wellbalanced government for a free
people. It is not to be wondered at, that a government instituted
in times so inauspicious, should on experiment be found greatly
deficient and inadequate to the purpose it was intended to answer.

This intelligent people perceived and regretted these defects.
Still continuing no less attached to union than enamored of
liberty, they observed the danger which immediately threatened the
former and more remotely the latter; and being pursuaded that ample
security for both could only be found in a national government more
wisely framed, they as with one voice, convened the late convention
at Philadelphia, to take that important subject under consideration.

This convention composed of men who possessed the confidence of
the people, and many of whom had become highly distinguished by
their patriotism, virtue and wisdom, in times which tried the minds
and hearts of men, undertook the arduous task. In the mild season
of peace, with minds unoccupied by other subjects, they passed many
months in cool, uninterrupted, and daily consultation; and finally,
without having been awed by power, or influenced by any passions
except love for their country, they presented and recommended to the
people the plan produced by their joint and very unanimous councils.

Admit, for so is the fact, that this plan is only RECOMMENDED,
not imposed, yet let it be remembered that it is neither recommended
to BLIND approbation, nor to BLIND reprobation; but to that sedate
and candid consideration which the magnitude and importance of the
subject demand, and which it certainly ought to receive. But this
(as was remarked in the foregoing number of this paper) is more to
be wished than expected, that it may be so considered and examined.
Experience on a former occasion teaches us not to be too sanguine
in such hopes. It is not yet forgotten that well-grounded
apprehensions of imminent danger induced the people of America to
form the memorable Congress of 1774. That body recommended certain
measures to their constituents, and the event proved their wisdom;
yet it is fresh in our memories how soon the press began to teem
with pamphlets and weekly papers against those very measures. Not
only many of the officers of government, who obeyed the dictates of
personal interest, but others, from a mistaken estimate of
consequences, or the undue influence of former attachments, or whose
ambition aimed at objects which did not correspond with the public
good, were indefatigable in their efforts to pursuade the people to
reject the advice of that patriotic Congress. Many, indeed, were
deceived and deluded, but the great majority of the people reasoned
and decided judiciously; and happy they are in reflecting that they
did so.

They considered that the Congress was composed of many wise and
experienced men. That, being convened from different parts of the
country, they brought with them and communicated to each other a
variety of useful information. That, in the course of the time they
passed together in inquiring into and discussing the true interests
of their country, they must have acquired very accurate knowledge on
that head. That they were individually interested in the public
liberty and prosperity, and therefore that it was not less their
inclination than their duty to recommend only such measures as,
after the most mature deliberation, they really thought prudent and
advisable.

These and similar considerations then induced the people to rely
greatly on the judgment and integrity of the Congress; and they
took their advice, notwithstanding the various arts and endeavors
used to deter them from it. But if the people at large had reason
to confide in the men of that Congress, few of whom had been fully
tried or generally known, still greater reason have they now to
respect the judgment and advice of the convention, for it is well
known that some of the most distinguished members of that Congress,
who have been since tried and justly approved for patriotism and
abilities, and who have grown old in acquiring political
information, were also members of this convention, and carried into
it their accumulated knowledge and experience.

It is worthy of remark that not only the first, but every
succeeding Congress, as well as the late convention, have invariably
joined with the people in thinking that the prosperity of America
depended on its Union. To preserve and perpetuate it was the great
object of the people in forming that convention, and it is also the
great object of the plan which the convention has advised them to
adopt. With what propriety, therefore, or for what good purposes,
are attempts at this particular period made by some men to
depreciate the importance of the Union? Or why is it suggested that
three or four confederacies would be better than one? I am
persuaded in my own mind that the people have always thought right
on this subject, and that their universal and uniform attachment to
the cause of the Union rests on great and weighty reasons, which I
shall endeavor to develop and explain in some ensuing papers. They
who promote the idea of substituting a number of distinct
confederacies in the room of the plan of the convention, seem
clearly to foresee that the rejection of it would put the
continuance of the Union in the utmost jeopardy. That certainly
would be the case, and I sincerely wish that it may be as clearly
foreseen by every good citizen, that whenever the dissolution of the
Union arrives, America will have reason to exclaim, in the words of
the poet: "FAREWELL! A LONG FAREWELL TO ALL MY GREATNESS."

To the People of the State of New York:

IT IS not a new observation that the people of any country (if,
like the Americans, intelligent and wellinformed) seldom adopt and
steadily persevere for many years in an erroneous opinion respecting
their interests. That consideration naturally tends to create great
respect for the high opinion which the people of America have so
long and uniformly entertained of the importance of their continuing
firmly united under one federal government, vested with sufficient
powers for all general and national purposes.

The more attentively I consider and investigate the reasons
which appear to have given birth to this opinion, the more I become
convinced that they are cogent and conclusive.

Among the many objects to which a wise and free people find it
necessary to direct their attention, that of providing for their
SAFETY seems to be the first. The SAFETY of the people doubtless
has relation to a great variety of circumstances and considerations,
and consequently affords great latitude to those who wish to define
it precisely and comprehensively.

At present I mean only to consider it as it respects security
for the preservation of peace and tranquillity, as well as against
dangers from FOREIGN ARMS AND INFLUENCE, as from dangers of the LIKE
KIND arising from domestic causes. As the former of these comes
first in order, it is proper it should be the first discussed. Let
us therefore proceed to examine whether the people are not right in
their opinion that a cordial Union, under an efficient national
government, affords them the best security that can be devised
against HOSTILITIES from abroad.

The number of wars which have happened or will happen in the
world will always be found to be in proportion to the number and
weight of the causes, whether REAL or PRETENDED, which PROVOKE or
INVITE them. If this remark be just, it becomes useful to inquire
whether so many JUST causes of war are likely to be given by UNITED
AMERICA as by DISUNITED America; for if it should turn out that
United America will probably give the fewest, then it will follow
that in this respect the Union tends most to preserve the people in
a state of peace with other nations.

The JUST causes of war, for the most part, arise either from
violation of treaties or from direct violence. America has already
formed treaties with no less than six foreign nations, and all of
them, except Prussia, are maritime, and therefore able to annoy and
injure us. She has also extensive commerce with Portugal, Spain,
and Britain, and, with respect to the two latter, has, in addition,
the circumstance of neighborhood to attend to.

It is of high importance to the peace of America that she
observe the laws of nations towards all these powers, and to me it
appears evident that this will be more perfectly and punctually done
by one national government than it could be either by thirteen
separate States or by three or four distinct confederacies.

Because when once an efficient national government is
established, the best men in the country will not only consent to
serve, but also will generally be appointed to manage it; for,
although town or country, or other contracted influence, may place
men in State assemblies, or senates, or courts of justice, or
executive departments, yet more general and extensive reputation for
talents and other qualifications will be necessary to recommend men
to offices under the national government,--especially as it will have
the widest field for choice, and never experience that want of
proper persons which is not uncommon in some of the States. Hence,
it will result that the administration, the political counsels, and
the judicial decisions of the national government will be more wise,
systematical, and judicious than those of individual States, and
consequently more satisfactory with respect to other nations, as
well as more SAFE with respect to us.

Because, under the national government, treaties and articles of
treaties, as well as the laws of nations, will always be expounded
in one sense and executed in the same manner,--whereas, adjudications
on the same points and questions, in thirteen States, or in three or
four confederacies, will not always accord or be consistent; and
that, as well from the variety of independent courts and judges
appointed by different and independent governments, as from the
different local laws and interests which may affect and influence
them. The wisdom of the convention, in committing such questions to
the jurisdiction and judgment of courts appointed by and responsible
only to one national government, cannot be too much commended.

Because the prospect of present loss or advantage may often
tempt the governing party in one or two States to swerve from good
faith and justice; but those temptations, not reaching the other
States, and consequently having little or no influence on the
national government, the temptation will be fruitless, and good
faith and justice be preserved. The case of the treaty of peace
with Britain adds great weight to this reasoning.

Because, even if the governing party in a State should be
disposed to resist such temptations, yet as such temptations may,
and commonly do, result from circumstances peculiar to the State,
and may affect a great number of the inhabitants, the governing
party may not always be able, if willing, to prevent the injustice
meditated, or to punish the aggressors. But the national
government, not being affected by those local circumstances, will
neither be induced to commit the wrong themselves, nor want power or
inclination to prevent or punish its commission by others.

So far, therefore, as either designed or accidental violations
of treaties and the laws of nations afford JUST causes of war, they
are less to be apprehended under one general government than under
several lesser ones, and in that respect the former most favors the
SAFETY of the people.

As to those just causes of war which proceed from direct and
unlawful violence, it appears equally clear to me that one good
national government affords vastly more security against dangers of
that sort than can be derived from any other quarter.

Because such violences are more frequently caused by the
passions and interests of a part than of the whole; of one or two
States than of the Union. Not a single Indian war has yet been
occasioned by aggressions of the present federal government, feeble
as it is; but there are several instances of Indian hostilities
having been provoked by the improper conduct of individual States,
who, either unable or unwilling to restrain or punish offenses, have
given occasion to the slaughter of many innocent inhabitants.

The neighborhood of Spanish and British territories, bordering
on some States and not on others, naturally confines the causes of
quarrel more immediately to the borderers. The bordering States, if
any, will be those who, under the impulse of sudden irritation, and
a quick sense of apparent interest or injury, will be most likely,
by direct violence, to excite war with these nations; and nothing
can so effectually obviate that danger as a national government,
whose wisdom and prudence will not be diminished by the passions
which actuate the parties immediately interested.

But not only fewer just causes of war will be given by the
national government, but it will also be more in their power to
accommodate and settle them amicably. They will be more temperate
and cool, and in that respect, as well as in others, will be more in
capacity to act advisedly than the offending State. The pride of
states, as well as of men, naturally disposes them to justify all
their actions, and opposes their acknowledging, correcting, or
repairing their errors and offenses. The national government, in
such cases, will not be affected by this pride, but will proceed
with moderation and candor to consider and decide on the means most
proper to extricate them from the difficulties which threaten them.

Besides, it is well known that acknowledgments, explanations,
and compensations are often accepted as satisfactory from a strong
united nation, which would be rejected as unsatisfactory if offered
by a State or confederacy of little consideration or power.

In the year 1685, the state of Genoa having offended Louis XIV.,
endeavored to appease him. He demanded that they should send their
Doge, or chief magistrate, accompanied by four of their
senators, to FRANCE, to ask his pardon and receive his terms. They
were obliged to submit to it for the sake of peace. Would he on any
occasion either have demanded or have received the like humiliation
from Spain, or Britain, or any other POWERFUL nation?

To the People of the State of New York:

MY LAST paper assigned several reasons why the safety of the
people would be best secured by union against the danger it may be
exposed to by JUST causes of war given to other nations; and those
reasons show that such causes would not only be more rarely given,
but would also be more easily accommodated, by a national government
than either by the State governments or the proposed little
confederacies.

But the safety of the people of America against dangers from
FOREIGN force depends not only on their forbearing to give JUST
causes of war to other nations, but also on their placing and
continuing themselves in such a situation as not to INVITE hostility
or insult; for it need not be observed that there are PRETENDED as
well as just causes of war.

It is too true, however disgraceful it may be to human nature,
that nations in general will make war whenever they have a prospect
of getting anything by it; nay, absolute monarchs will often make
war when their nations are to get nothing by it, but for the
purposes and objects merely personal, such as thirst for military
glory, revenge for personal affronts, ambition, or private compacts
to aggrandize or support their particular families or partisans.
These and a variety of other motives, which affect only the mind of
the sovereign, often lead him to engage in wars not sanctified by
justice or the voice and interests of his people. But, independent
of these inducements to war, which are more prevalent in absolute
monarchies, but which well deserve our attention, there are others
which affect nations as often as kings; and some of them will on
examination be found to grow out of our relative situation and
circumstances.

With France and with Britain we are rivals in the fisheries, and
can supply their markets cheaper than they can themselves,
notwithstanding any efforts to prevent it by bounties on their own
or duties on foreign fish.

With them and with most other European nations we are rivals in
navigation and the carrying trade; and we shall deceive ourselves
if we suppose that any of them will rejoice to see it flourish;
for, as our carrying trade cannot increase without in some degree
diminishing theirs, it is more their interest, and will be more
their policy, to restrain than to promote it.

In the trade to China and India, we interfere with more than one
nation, inasmuch as it enables us to partake in advantages which
they had in a manner monopolized, and as we thereby supply ourselves
with commodities which we used to purchase from them.

The extension of our own commerce in our own vessels cannot give
pleasure to any nations who possess territories on or near this
continent, because the cheapness and excellence of our productions,
added to the circumstance of vicinity, and the enterprise and
address of our merchants and navigators, will give us a greater
share in the advantages which those territories afford, than
consists with the wishes or policy of their respective sovereigns.

Spain thinks it convenient to shut the Mississippi against us on
the one side, and Britain excludes us from the Saint Lawrence on the
other; nor will either of them permit the other waters which are
between them and us to become the means of mutual intercourse and
traffic.

From these and such like considerations, which might, if
consistent with prudence, be more amplified and detailed, it is easy
to see that jealousies and uneasinesses may gradually slide into the
minds and cabinets of other nations, and that we are not to expect
that they should regard our advancement in union, in power and
consequence by land and by sea, with an eye of indifference and
composure.

The people of America are aware that inducements to war may
arise out of these circumstances, as well as from others not so
obvious at present, and that whenever such inducements may find fit
time and opportunity for operation, pretenses to color and justify
them will not be wanting. Wisely, therefore, do they consider union
and a good national government as necessary to put and keep them in
SUCH A SITUATION as, instead of INVITING war, will tend to repress
and discourage it. That situation consists in the best possible
state of defense, and necessarily depends on the government, the
arms, and the resources of the country.

As the safety of the whole is the interest of the whole, and
cannot be provided for without government, either one or more or
many, let us inquire whether one good government is not, relative to
the object in question, more competent than any other given number
whatever.

One government can collect and avail itself of the talents and
experience of the ablest men, in whatever part of the Union they may
be found. It can move on uniform principles of policy. It can
harmonize, assimilate, and protect the several parts and members,
and extend the benefit of its foresight and precautions to each. In
the formation of treaties, it will regard the interest of the whole,
and the particular interests of the parts as connected with that of
the whole. It can apply the resources and power of the whole to the
defense of any particular part, and that more easily and
expeditiously than State governments or separate confederacies can
possibly do, for want of concert and unity of system. It can place
the militia under one plan of discipline, and, by putting their
officers in a proper line of subordination to the Chief Magistrate,
will, as it were, consolidate them into one corps, and thereby
render them more efficient than if divided into thirteen or into
three or four distinct independent companies.

What would the militia of Britain be if the English militia
obeyed the government of England, if the Scotch militia obeyed the
government of Scotland, and if the Welsh militia obeyed the
government of Wales? Suppose an invasion; would those three
governments (if they agreed at all) be able, with all their
respective forces, to operate against the enemy so effectually as
the single government of Great Britain would?

We have heard much of the fleets of Britain, and the time may
come, if we are wise, when the fleets of America may engage
attention. But if one national government, had not so regulated the
navigation of Britain as to make it a nursery for seamen--if one
national government had not called forth all the national means and
materials for forming fleets, their prowess and their thunder would
never have been celebrated. Let England have its navigation and
fleet--let Scotland have its navigation and fleet--let Wales have its
navigation and fleet--let Ireland have its navigation and fleet--let
those four of the constituent parts of the British empire be
under four independent governments, and it is easy to perceive how
soon they would each dwindle into comparative insignificance.

Apply these facts to our own case. Leave America divided into
thirteen or, if you please, into three or four independent
governments--what armies could they raise and pay--what fleets could
they ever hope to have? If one was attacked, would the others fly
to its succor, and spend their blood and money in its defense?
Would there be no danger of their being flattered into neutrality
by its specious promises, or seduced by a too great fondness for
peace to decline hazarding their tranquillity and present safety for
the sake of neighbors, of whom perhaps they have been jealous, and
whose importance they are content to see diminished? Although such
conduct would not be wise, it would, nevertheless, be natural. The
history of the states of Greece, and of other countries, abounds
with such instances, and it is not improbable that what has so often
happened would, under similar circumstances, happen again.

But admit that they might be willing to help the invaded State
or confederacy. How, and when, and in what proportion shall aids of
men and money be afforded? Who shall command the allied armies, and
from which of them shall he receive his orders? Who shall settle
the terms of peace, and in case of disputes what umpire shall decide
between them and compel acquiescence? Various difficulties and
inconveniences would be inseparable from such a situation; whereas
one government, watching over the general and common interests, and
combining and directing the powers and resources of the whole, would
be free from all these embarrassments, and conduce far more to the
safety of the people.

But whatever may be our situation, whether firmly united under
one national government, or split into a number of confederacies,
certain it is, that foreign nations will know and view it exactly as
it is; and they will act toward us accordingly. If they see that
our national government is efficient and well administered, our
trade prudently regulated, our militia properly organized and
disciplined, our resources and finances discreetly managed, our
credit re-established, our people free, contented, and united, they
will be much more disposed to cultivate our friendship than provoke
our resentment. If, on the other hand, they find us either
destitute of an effectual government (each State doing right or
wrong, as to its rulers may seem convenient), or split into three or
four independent and probably discordant republics or confederacies,
one inclining to Britain, another to France, and a third to Spain,
and perhaps played off against each other by the three, what a poor,
pitiful figure will America make in their eyes! How liable would
she become not only to their contempt but to their outrage, and how
soon would dear-bought experience proclaim that when a people or
family so divide, it never fails to be against themselves.

To the People of the State of New York:

QUEEN ANNE, in her letter of the 1st July, 1706, to the Scotch
Parliament, makes some observations on the importance of the UNION
then forming between England and Scotland, which merit our attention.
I shall present the public with one or two extracts from it: "An
entire and perfect union will be the solid foundation of lasting
peace: It will secure your religion, liberty, and property; remove
the animosities amongst yourselves, and the jealousies and
differences betwixt our two kingdoms. It must increase your
strength, riches, and trade; and by this union the whole island,
being joined in affection and free from all apprehensions of
different interest, will be ENABLED TO RESIST ALL ITS ENEMIES."
"We most earnestly recommend to you calmness and unanimity in this
great and weighty affair, that the union may be brought to a happy
conclusion, being the only EFFECTUAL way to secure our present and
future happiness, and disappoint the designs of our and your
enemies, who will doubtless, on this occasion, USE THEIR UTMOST
ENDEAVORS TO PREVENT OR DELAY THIS UNION."

It was remarked in the preceding paper, that weakness and
divisions at home would invite dangers from abroad; and that
nothing would tend more to secure us from them than union, strength,
and good government within ourselves. This subject is copious and
cannot easily be exhausted.

The history of Great Britain is the one with which we are in
general the best acquainted, and it gives us many useful lessons.
We may profit by their experience without paying the price which it
cost them. Although it seems obvious to common sense that the
people of such an island should be but one nation, yet we find that
they were for ages divided into three, and that those three were
almost constantly embroiled in quarrels and wars with one another.
Notwithstanding their true interest with respect to the continental
nations was really the same, yet by the arts and policy and
practices of those nations, their mutual jealousies were perpetually
kept inflamed, and for a long series of years they were far more
inconvenient and troublesome than they were useful and assisting to
each other.

Should the people of America divide themselves into three or
four nations, would not the same thing happen? Would not similar
jealousies arise, and be in like manner cherished? Instead of their
being "joined in affection" and free from all apprehension of
different "interests," envy and jealousy would soon extinguish
confidence and affection, and the partial interests of each
confederacy, instead of the general interests of all America, would
be the only objects of their policy and pursuits. Hence, like most
other BORDERING nations, they would always be either involved in
disputes and war, or live in the constant apprehension of them.

The most sanguine advocates for three or four confederacies
cannot reasonably suppose that they would long remain exactly on an
equal footing in point of strength, even if it was possible to form
them so at first; but, admitting that to be practicable, yet what
human contrivance can secure the continuance of such equality?
Independent of those local circumstances which tend to beget and
increase power in one part and to impede its progress in another, we
must advert to the effects of that superior policy and good
management which would probably distinguish the government of one
above the rest, and by which their relative equality in strength and
consideration would be destroyed. For it cannot be presumed that
the same degree of sound policy, prudence, and foresight would
uniformly be observed by each of these confederacies for a long
succession of years.

Whenever, and from whatever causes, it might happen, and happen
it would, that any one of these nations or confederacies should rise
on the scale of political importance much above the degree of her
neighbors, that moment would those neighbors behold her with envy
and with fear. Both those passions would lead them to countenance,
if not to promote, whatever might promise to diminish her
importance; and would also restrain them from measures calculated
to advance or even to secure her prosperity. Much time would not be
necessary to enable her to discern these unfriendly dispositions.
She would soon begin, not only to lose confidence in her neighbors,
but also to feel a disposition equally unfavorable to them.
Distrust naturally creates distrust, and by nothing is good-will
and kind conduct more speedily changed than by invidious jealousies
and uncandid imputations, whether expressed or implied.

The North is generally the region of strength, and many local
circumstances render it probable that the most Northern of the
proposed confederacies would, at a period not very distant, be
unquestionably more formidable than any of the others. No sooner
would this become evident than the NORTHERN HIVE would excite the
same ideas and sensations in the more southern parts of America
which it formerly did in the southern parts of Europe. Nor does it
appear to be a rash conjecture that its young swarms might often be
tempted to gather honey in the more blooming fields and milder air
of their luxurious and more delicate neighbors.

They who well consider the history of similar divisions and
confederacies will find abundant reason to apprehend that those in
contemplation would in no other sense be neighbors than as they
would be borderers; that they would neither love nor trust one
another, but on the contrary would be a prey to discord, jealousy,
and mutual injuries; in short, that they would place us exactly in
the situations in which some nations doubtless wish to see us, viz.,
FORMIDABLE ONLY TO EACH OTHER.

From these considerations it appears that those gentlemen are
greatly mistaken who suppose that alliances offensive and defensive
might be formed between these confederacies, and would produce that
combination and union of wills of arms and of resources, which would
be necessary to put and keep them in a formidable state of defense
against foreign enemies.

When did the independent states, into which Britain and Spain
were formerly divided, combine in such alliance, or unite their
forces against a foreign enemy? The proposed confederacies will be
DISTINCT NATIONS. Each of them would have its commerce with
foreigners to regulate by distinct treaties; and as their
productions and commodities are different and proper for different
markets, so would those treaties be essentially different.
Different commercial concerns must create different interests, and
of course different degrees of political attachment to and
connection with different foreign nations. Hence it might and
probably would happen that the foreign nation with whom the SOUTHERN
confederacy might be at war would be the one with whom the NORTHERN
confederacy would be the most desirous of preserving peace and
friendship. An alliance so contrary to their immediate interest
would not therefore be easy to form, nor, if formed, would it be
observed and fulfilled with perfect good faith.

Nay, it is far more probable that in America, as in Europe,
neighboring nations, acting under the impulse of opposite interests
and unfriendly passions, would frequently be found taking different
sides. Considering our distance from Europe, it would be more
natural for these confederacies to apprehend danger from one another
than from distant nations, and therefore that each of them should be
more desirous to guard against the others by the aid of foreign
alliances, than to guard against foreign dangers by alliances
between themselves. And here let us not forget how much more easy
it is to receive foreign fleets into our ports, and foreign armies
into our country, than it is to persuade or compel them to depart.
How many conquests did the Romans and others make in the characters
of allies, and what innovations did they under the same character
introduce into the governments of those whom they pretended to
protect.

Let candid men judge, then, whether the division of America into
any given number of independent sovereignties would tend to secure
us against the hostilities and improper interference of foreign
nations.

To the People of the State of New York:

WE HAVE seen the necessity of the Union, as our bulwark against
foreign danger, as the conservator of peace among ourselves, as the
guardian of our commerce and other common interests, as the only
substitute for those military establishments which have subverted
the liberties of the Old World, and as the proper antidote for the
diseases of faction, which have proved fatal to other popular
governments, and of which alarming symptoms have been betrayed by
our own. All that remains, within this branch of our inquiries, is
to take notice of an objection that may be drawn from the great
extent of country which the Union embraces. A few observations on
this subject will be the more proper, as it is perceived that the
adversaries of the new Constitution are availing themselves of the
prevailing prejudice with regard to the practicable sphere of
republican administration, in order to supply, by imaginary
difficulties, the want of those solid objections which they endeavor
in vain to find.

The error which limits republican government to a narrow
district has been unfolded and refuted in preceding papers. I
remark here only that it seems to owe its rise and prevalence
chiefly to the confounding of a republic with a democracy, applying
to the former reasonings drawn from the nature of the latter. The
true distinction between these forms was also adverted to on a
former occasion. It is, that in a democracy, the people meet and
exercise the government in person; in a republic, they assemble and
administer it by their representatives and agents. A democracy,
consequently, will be confined to a small spot. A republic may be
extended over a large region.

To this accidental source of the error may be added the artifice
of some celebrated authors, whose writings have had a great share in
forming the modern standard of political opinions. Being subjects
either of an absolute or limited monarchy, they have endeavored to
heighten the advantages, or palliate the evils of those forms, by
placing in comparison the vices and defects of the republican, and
by citing as specimens of the latter the turbulent democracies of
ancient Greece and modern Italy. Under the confusion of names, it
has been an easy task to transfer to a republic observations
applicable to a democracy only; and among others, the observation
that it can never be established but among a small number of people,
living within a small compass of territory.

Such a fallacy may have been the less perceived, as most of the
popular governments of antiquity were of the democratic species;
and even in modern Europe, to which we owe the great principle of
representation, no example is seen of a government wholly popular,
and founded, at the same time, wholly on that principle. If Europe
has the merit of discovering this great mechanical power in
government, by the simple agency of which the will of the largest
political body may be concentred, and its force directed to any
object which the public good requires, America can claim the merit
of making the discovery the basis of unmixed and extensive republics.
It is only to be lamented that any of her citizens should wish to
deprive her of the additional merit of displaying its full efficacy
in the establishment of the comprehensive system now under her
consideration.

As the natural limit of a democracy is that distance from the
central point which will just permit the most remote citizens to
assemble as often as their public functions demand, and will include
no greater number than can join in those functions; so the natural
limit of a republic is that distance from the centre which will
barely allow the representatives to meet as often as may be
necessary for the administration of public affairs. Can it be said
that the limits of the United States exceed this distance? It will
not be said by those who recollect that the Atlantic coast is the
longest side of the Union, that during the term of thirteen years,
the representatives of the States have been almost continually
assembled, and that the members from the most distant States are not
chargeable with greater intermissions of attendance than those from
the States in the neighborhood of Congress.

That we may form a juster estimate with regard to this
interesting subject, let us resort to the actual dimensions of the
Union. The limits, as fixed by the treaty of peace, are: on the
east the Atlantic, on the south the latitude of thirty-one degrees,
on the west the Mississippi, and on the north an irregular line
running in some instances beyond the forty-fifth degree, in others
falling as low as the forty-second. The southern shore of Lake Erie
lies below that latitude. Computing the distance between the
thirty-first and forty-fifth degrees, it amounts to nine hundred and
seventy-three common miles; computing it from thirty-one to
forty-two degrees, to seven hundred and sixty-four miles and a half.
Taking the mean for the distance, the amount will be eight hundred
and sixty-eight miles and three-fourths. The mean distance from the
Atlantic to the Mississippi does not probably exceed seven hundred
and fifty miles. On a comparison of this extent with that of
several countries in Europe, the practicability of rendering our
system commensurate to it appears to be demonstrable. It is not a
great deal larger than Germany, where a diet representing the whole
empire is continually assembled; or than Poland before the late
dismemberment, where another national diet was the depositary of the
supreme power. Passing by France and Spain, we find that in Great
Britain, inferior as it may be in size, the representatives of the
northern extremity of the island have as far to travel to the
national council as will be required of those of the most remote
parts of the Union.

Favorable as this view of the subject may be, some observations
remain which will place it in a light still more satisfactory.

In the first place it is to be remembered that the general
government is not to be charged with the whole power of making and
administering laws. Its jurisdiction is limited to certain
enumerated objects, which concern all the members of the republic,
but which are not to be attained by the separate provisions of any.
The subordinate governments, which can extend their care to all
those other subjects which can be separately provided for, will
retain their due authority and activity. Were it proposed by the
plan of the convention to abolish the governments of the particular
States, its adversaries would have some ground for their objection;
though it would not be difficult to show that if they were
abolished the general government would be compelled, by the
principle of self-preservation, to reinstate them in their proper
jurisdiction.

A second observation to be made is that the immediate object of
the federal Constitution is to secure the union of the thirteen
primitive States, which we know to be practicable; and to add to
them such other States as may arise in their own bosoms, or in their
neighborhoods, which we cannot doubt to be equally practicable. The
arrangements that may be necessary for those angles and fractions of
our territory which lie on our northwestern frontier, must be left
to those whom further discoveries and experience will render more
equal to the task.

Let it be remarked, in the third place, that the intercourse
throughout the Union will be facilitated by new improvements. Roads
will everywhere be shortened, and kept in better order;
accommodations for travelers will be multiplied and meliorated; an
interior navigation on our eastern side will be opened throughout,
or nearly throughout, the whole extent of the thirteen States. The
communication between the Western and Atlantic districts, and
between different parts of each, will be rendered more and more easy
by those numerous canals with which the beneficence of nature has
intersected our country, and which art finds it so little difficult
to connect and complete.

A fourth and still more important consideration is, that as
almost every State will, on one side or other, be a frontier, and
will thus find, in regard to its safety, an inducement to make some
sacrifices for the sake of the general protection; so the States
which lie at the greatest distance from the heart of the Union, and
which, of course, may partake least of the ordinary circulation of
its benefits, will be at the same time immediately contiguous to
foreign nations, and will consequently stand, on particular
occasions, in greatest need of its strength and resources. It may
be inconvenient for Georgia, or the States forming our western or
northeastern borders, to send their representatives to the seat of
government; but they would find it more so to struggle alone
against an invading enemy, or even to support alone the whole
expense of those precautions which may be dictated by the
neighborhood of continual danger. If they should derive less
benefit, therefore, from the Union in some respects than the less
distant States, they will derive greater benefit from it in other
respects, and thus the proper equilibrium will be maintained
throughout.

I submit to you, my fellow-citizens, these considerations, in
full confidence that the good sense which has so often marked your
decisions will allow them their due weight and effect; and that you
will never suffer difficulties, however formidable in appearance, or
however fashionable the error on which they may be founded, to drive
you into the gloomy and perilous scene into which the advocates for
disunion would conduct you. Hearken not to the unnatural voice
which tells you that the people of America, knit together as they
are by so many cords of affection, can no longer live together as
members of the same family; can no longer continue the mutual
guardians of their mutual happiness; can no longer be
fellowcitizens of one great, respectable, and flourishing empire.
Hearken not to the voice which petulantly tells you that the form
of government recommended for your adoption is a novelty in the
political world; that it has never yet had a place in the theories
of the wildest projectors; that it rashly attempts what it is
impossible to accomplish. No, my countrymen, shut your ears against
this unhallowed language. Shut your hearts against the poison which
it conveys; the kindred blood which flows in the veins of American
citizens, the mingled blood which they have shed in defense of their
sacred rights, consecrate their Union, and excite horror at the idea
of their becoming aliens, rivals, enemies. And if novelties are to
be shunned, believe me, the most alarming of all novelties, the most
wild of all projects, the most rash of all attempts, is that of
rendering us in pieces, in order to preserve our liberties and
promote our happiness. But why is the experiment of an extended
republic to be rejected, merely because it may comprise what is new?
Is it not the glory of the people of America, that, whilst they
have paid a decent regard to the opinions of former times and other
nations, they have not suffered a blind veneration for antiquity,
for custom, or for names, to overrule the suggestions of their own
good sense, the knowledge of their own situation, and the lessons of
their own experience? To this manly spirit, posterity will be
indebted for the possession, and the world for the example, of the
numerous innovations displayed on the American theatre, in favor of
private rights and public happiness. Had no important step been
taken by the leaders of the Revolution for which a precedent could
not be discovered, no government established of which an exact model
did not present itself, the people of the United States might, at
this moment have been numbered among the melancholy victims of
misguided councils, must at best have been laboring under the weight
of some of those forms which have crushed the liberties of the rest
of mankind. Happily for America, happily, we trust, for the whole
human race, they pursued a new and more noble course. They
accomplished a revolution which has no parallel in the annals of
human society. They reared the fabrics of governments which have no
model on the face of the globe. They formed the design of a great
Confederacy, which it is incumbent on their successors to improve
and perpetuate. If their works betray imperfections, we wonder at
the fewness of them. If they erred most in the structure of the
Union, this was the work most difficult to be executed; this is the
work which has been new modelled by the act of your convention, and
it is that act on which you are now to deliberate and to decide.

To the People of the State of New York:

IN REVIEWING the defects of the existing Confederation, and
showing that they cannot be supplied by a government of less energy
than that before the public, several of the most important
principles of the latter fell of course under consideration. But as
the ultimate object of these papers is to determine clearly and
fully the merits of this Constitution, and the expediency of
adopting it, our plan cannot be complete without taking a more
critical and thorough survey of the work of the convention, without
examining it on all its sides, comparing it in all its parts, and
calculating its probable effects.

That this remaining task may be executed under impressions
conducive to a just and fair result, some reflections must in this
place be indulged, which candor previously suggests.

It is a misfortune, inseparable from human affairs, that public
measures are rarely investigated with that spirit of moderation
which is essential to a just estimate of their real tendency to
advance or obstruct the public good; and that this spirit is more
apt to be diminished than promoted, by those occasions which require
an unusual exercise of it. To those who have been led by experience
to attend to this consideration, it could not appear surprising,
that the act of the convention, which recommends so many important
changes and innovations, which may be viewed in so many lights and
relations, and which touches the springs of so many passions and
interests, should find or excite dispositions unfriendly, both on
one side and on the other, to a fair discussion and accurate
judgment of its merits. In some, it has been too evident from their
own publications, that they have scanned the proposed Constitution,
not only with a predisposition to censure, but with a
predetermination to condemn; as the language held by others betrays
an opposite predetermination or bias, which must render their
opinions also of little moment in the question. In placing,
however, these different characters on a level, with respect to the
weight of their opinions, I wish not to insinuate that there may not
be a material difference in the purity of their intentions. It is
but just to remark in favor of the latter description, that as our
situation is universally admitted to be peculiarly critical, and to
require indispensably that something should be done for our relief,
the predetermined patron of what has been actually done may have
taken his bias from the weight of these considerations, as well as
from considerations of a sinister nature. The predetermined
adversary, on the other hand, can have been governed by no venial
motive whatever. The intentions of the first may be upright, as
they may on the contrary be culpable. The views of the last cannot
be upright, and must be culpable. But the truth is, that these
papers are not addressed to persons falling under either of these
characters. They solicit the attention of those only, who add to a
sincere zeal for the happiness of their country, a temper favorable
to a just estimate of the means of promoting it.

Persons of this character will proceed to an examination of the
plan submitted by the convention, not only without a disposition to
find or to magnify faults; but will see the propriety of
reflecting, that a faultless plan was not to be expected. Nor will
they barely make allowances for the errors which may be chargeable
on the fallibility to which the convention, as a body of men, were
liable; but will keep in mind, that they themselves also are but
men, and ought not to assume an infallibility in rejudging the
fallible opinions of others.

With equal readiness will it be perceived, that besides these
inducements to candor, many allowances ought to be made for the
difficulties inherent in the very nature of the undertaking referred
to the convention.

The novelty of the undertaking immediately strikes us. It has
been shown in the course of these papers, that the existing
Confederation is founded on principles which are fallacious; that
we must consequently change this first foundation, and with it the
superstructure resting upon it. It has been shown, that the other
confederacies which could be consulted as precedents have been
vitiated by the same erroneous principles, and can therefore furnish
no other light than that of beacons, which give warning of the
course to be shunned, without pointing out that which ought to be
pursued. The most that the convention could do in such a situation,
was to avoid the errors suggested by the past experience of other
countries, as well as of our own; and to provide a convenient mode
of rectifying their own errors, as future experiences may unfold
them.

Among the difficulties encountered by the convention, a very
important one must have lain in combining the requisite stability
and energy in government, with the inviolable attention due to
liberty and to the republican form. Without substantially
accomplishing this part of their undertaking, they would have very
imperfectly fulfilled the object of their appointment, or the
expectation of the public; yet that it could not be easily
accomplished, will be denied by no one who is unwilling to betray
his ignorance of the subject. Energy in government is essential to
that security against external and internal danger, and to that
prompt and salutary execution of the laws which enter into the very
definition of good government. Stability in government is essential
to national character and to the advantages annexed to it, as well
as to that repose and confidence in the minds of the people, which
are among the chief blessings of civil society. An irregular and
mutable legislation is not more an evil in itself than it is odious
to the people; and it may be pronounced with assurance that the
people of this country, enlightened as they are with regard to the
nature, and interested, as the great body of them are, in the
effects of good government, will never be satisfied till some remedy
be applied to the vicissitudes and uncertainties which characterize
the State administrations. On comparing, however, these valuable
ingredients with the vital principles of liberty, we must perceive
at once the difficulty of mingling them together in their due
proportions. The genius of republican liberty seems to demand on
one side, not only that all power should be derived from the people,
but that those intrusted with it should be kept in independence on
the people, by a short duration of their appointments; and that
even during this short period the trust should be placed not in a
few, but a number of hands. Stability, on the contrary, requires
that the hands in which power is lodged should continue for a length
of time the same. A frequent change of men will result from a
frequent return of elections; and a frequent change of measures
from a frequent change of men: whilst energy in government requires
not only a certain duration of power, but the execution of it by a
single hand.

How far the convention may have succeeded in this part of their
work, will better appear on a more accurate view of it. From the
cursory view here taken, it must clearly appear to have been an
arduous part.

Not less arduous must have been the task of marking the proper
line of partition between the authority of the general and that of
the State governments. Every man will be sensible of this
difficulty, in proportion as he has been accustomed to contemplate
and discriminate objects extensive and complicated in their nature.
The faculties of the mind itself have never yet been distinguished
and defined, with satisfactory precision, by all the efforts of the
most acute and metaphysical philosophers. Sense, perception,
judgment, desire, volition, memory, imagination, are found to be
separated by such delicate shades and minute gradations that their
boundaries have eluded the most subtle investigations, and remain a
pregnant source of ingenious disquisition and controversy. The
boundaries between the great kingdom of nature, and, still more,
between the various provinces, and lesser portions, into which they
are subdivided, afford another illustration of the same important
truth. The most sagacious and laborious naturalists have never yet
succeeded in tracing with certainty the line which separates the
district of vegetable life from the neighboring region of
unorganized matter, or which marks the termination of the former and
the commencement of the animal empire. A still greater obscurity
lies in the distinctive characters by which the objects in each of
these great departments of nature have been arranged and assorted.

When we pass from the works of nature, in which all the
delineations are perfectly accurate, and appear to be otherwise only
from the imperfection of the eye which surveys them, to the
institutions of man, in which the obscurity arises as well from the
object itself as from the organ by which it is contemplated, we must
perceive the necessity of moderating still further our expectations
and hopes from the efforts of human sagacity. Experience has
instructed us that no skill in the science of government has yet
been able to discriminate and define, with sufficient certainty, its
three great provinces the legislative, executive, and judiciary; or
even the privileges and powers of the different legislative branches.
Questions daily occur in the course of practice, which prove the
obscurity which reins in these subjects, and which puzzle the
greatest adepts in political science.

The experience of ages, with the continued and combined labors
of the most enlightened legislatures and jurists, has been equally
unsuccessful in delineating the several objects and limits of
different codes of laws and different tribunals of justice. The
precise extent of the common law, and the statute law, the maritime
law, the ecclesiastical law, the law of corporations, and other
local laws and customs, remains still to be clearly and finally
established in Great Britain, where accuracy in such subjects has
been more industriously pursued than in any other part of the world.
The jurisdiction of her several courts, general and local, of law,
of equity, of admiralty, etc., is not less a source of frequent and
intricate discussions, sufficiently denoting the indeterminate
limits by which they are respectively circumscribed. All new laws,
though penned with the greatest technical skill, and passed on the
fullest and most mature deliberation, are considered as more or less
obscure and equivocal, until their meaning be liquidated and
ascertained by a series of particular discussions and adjudications.
Besides the obscurity arising from the complexity of objects, and
the imperfection of the human faculties, the medium through which
the conceptions of men are conveyed to each other adds a fresh
embarrassment. The use of words is to express ideas. Perspicuity,
therefore, requires not only that the ideas should be distinctly
formed, but that they should be expressed by words distinctly and
exclusively appropriate to them. But no language is so copious as
to supply words and phrases for every complex idea, or so correct as
not to include many equivocally denoting different ideas. Hence it
must happen that however accurately objects may be discriminated in
themselves, and however accurately the discrimination may be
considered, the definition of them may be rendered inaccurate by the
inaccuracy of the terms in which it is delivered. And this
unavoidable inaccuracy must be greater or less, according to the
complexity and novelty of the objects defined. When the Almighty
himself condescends to address mankind in their own language, his
meaning, luminous as it must be, is rendered dim and doubtful by the
cloudy medium through which it is communicated.

Here, then, are three sources of vague and incorrect
definitions: indistinctness of the object, imperfection of the
organ of conception, inadequateness of the vehicle of ideas. Any
one of these must produce a certain degree of obscurity. The
convention, in delineating the boundary between the federal and
State jurisdictions, must have experienced the full effect of them
all.

To the difficulties already mentioned may be added the
interfering pretensions of the larger and smaller States. We cannot
err in supposing that the former would contend for a participation
in the government, fully proportioned to their superior wealth and
importance; and that the latter would not be less tenacious of the
equality at present enjoyed by them. We may well suppose that
neither side would entirely yield to the other, and consequently
that the struggle could be terminated only by compromise. It is
extremely probable, also, that after the ratio of representation had
been adjusted, this very compromise must have produced a fresh
struggle between the same parties, to give such a turn to the
organization of the government, and to the distribution of its
powers, as would increase the importance of the branches, in forming
which they had respectively obtained the greatest share of influence.
There are features in the Constitution which warrant each of these
suppositions; and as far as either of them is well founded, it
shows that the convention must have been compelled to sacrifice
theoretical propriety to the force of extraneous considerations.

Nor could it have been the large and small States only, which
would marshal themselves in opposition to each other on various
points. Other combinations, resulting from a difference of local
position and policy, must have created additional difficulties. As
every State may be divided into different districts, and its
citizens into different classes, which give birth to contending
interests and local jealousies, so the different parts of the United
States are distinguished from each other by a variety of
circumstances, which produce a like effect on a larger scale. And
although this variety of interests, for reasons sufficiently
explained in a former paper, may have a salutary influence on the
administration of the government when formed, yet every one must be
sensible of the contrary influence, which must have been experienced
in the task of forming it.

Would it be wonderful if, under the pressure of all these
difficulties, the convention should have been forced into some
deviations from that artificial structure and regular symmetry which
an abstract view of the subject might lead an ingenious theorist to
bestow on a Constitution planned in his closet or in his
imagination? The real wonder is that so many difficulties should
have been surmounted, and surmounted with a unanimity almost as
unprecedented as it must have been unexpected. It is impossible for
any man of candor to reflect on this circumstance without partaking
of the astonishment. It is impossible for the man of pious
reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand
which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in
the critical stages of the revolution.

We had occasion, in a former paper, to take notice of the
repeated trials which have been unsuccessfully made in the United
Netherlands for reforming the baneful and notorious vices of their
constitution. The history of almost all the great councils and
consultations held among mankind for reconciling their discordant
opinions, assuaging their mutual jealousies, and adjusting their
respective interests, is a history of factions, contentions, and
disappointments, and may be classed among the most dark and degraded
pictures which display the infirmities and depravities of the human
character. If, in a few scattered instances, a brighter aspect is
presented, they serve only as exceptions to admonish us of the
general truth; and by their lustre to darken the gloom of the
adverse prospect to which they are contrasted. In revolving the
causes from which these exceptions result, and applying them to the
particular instances before us, we are necessarily led to two
important conclusions. The first is, that the convention must have
enjoyed, in a very singular degree, an exemption from the
pestilential influence of party animosities the disease most
incident to deliberative bodies, and most apt to contaminate their
proceedings. The second conclusion is that all the deputations
composing the convention were satisfactorily accommodated by the
final act, or were induced to accede to it by a deep conviction of
the necessity of sacrificing private opinions and partial interests
to the public good, and by a despair of seeing this necessity
diminished by delays or by new experiments.

To the People of the State of New York:

IT IS not a little remarkable that in every case reported by
ancient history, in which government has been established with
deliberation and consent, the task of framing it has not been
committed to an assembly of men, but has been performed by some
individual citizen of preeminent wisdom and approved integrity.

Minos, we learn, was the primitive founder of the government of
Crete, as Zaleucus was of that of the Locrians. Theseus first, and
after him Draco and Solon, instituted the government of Athens.
Lycurgus was the lawgiver of Sparta. The foundation of the
original government of Rome was laid by Romulus, and the work
completed by two of his elective successors, Numa and Tullius
Hostilius. On the abolition of royalty the consular administration
was substituted by Brutus, who stepped forward with a project for
such a reform, which, he alleged, had been prepared by Tullius
Hostilius, and to which his address obtained the assent and
ratification of the senate and people. This remark is applicable to
confederate governments also. Amphictyon, we are told, was the
author of that which bore his name. The Achaean league received its
first birth from Achaeus, and its second from Aratus.

What degree of agency these reputed lawgivers might have in
their respective establishments, or how far they might be clothed
with the legitimate authority of the people, cannot in every
instance be ascertained. In some, however, the proceeding was
strictly regular. Draco appears to have been intrusted by the
people of Athens with indefinite powers to reform its government and
laws. And Solon, according to Plutarch, was in a manner compelled,
by the universal suffrage of his fellow-citizens, to take upon him
the sole and absolute power of new-modeling the constitution. The
proceedings under Lycurgus were less regular; but as far as the
advocates for a regular reform could prevail, they all turned their
eyes towards the single efforts of that celebrated patriot and sage,
instead of seeking to bring about a revolution by the intervention
of a deliberative body of citizens.

Whence could it have proceeded, that a people, jealous as the
Greeks were of their liberty, should so far abandon the rules of
caution as to place their destiny in the hands of a single citizen?
Whence could it have proceeded, that the Athenians, a people who
would not suffer an army to be commanded by fewer than ten generals,
and who required no other proof of danger to their liberties than
the illustrious merit of a fellow-citizen, should consider one
illustrious citizen as a more eligible depositary of the fortunes of
themselves and their posterity, than a select body of citizens, from
whose common deliberations more wisdom, as well as more safety,
might have been expected? These questions cannot be fully answered,
without supposing that the fears of discord and disunion among a
number of counsellors exceeded the apprehension of treachery or
incapacity in a single individual. History informs us, likewise, of
the difficulties with which these celebrated reformers had to
contend, as well as the expedients which they were obliged to employ
in order to carry their reforms into effect. Solon, who seems to
have indulged a more temporizing policy, confessed that he had not
given to his countrymen the government best suited to their
happiness, but most tolerable to their prejudices. And Lycurgus,
more true to his object, was under the necessity of mixing a portion
of violence with the authority of superstition, and of securing his
final success by a voluntary renunciation, first of his country, and
then of his life. If these lessons teach us, on one hand, to admire
the improvement made by America on the ancient mode of preparing and
establishing regular plans of government, they serve not less, on
the other, to admonish us of the hazards and difficulties incident
to such experiments, and of the great imprudence of unnecessarily
multiplying them.

Is it an unreasonable conjecture, that the errors which may be
contained in the plan of the convention are such as have resulted
rather from the defect of antecedent experience on this complicated
and difficult subject, than from a want of accuracy or care in the
investigation of it; and, consequently such as will not be
ascertained until an actual trial shall have pointed them out? This
conjecture is rendered probable, not only by many considerations of
a general nature, but by the particular case of the Articles of
Confederation. It is observable that among the numerous objections
and amendments suggested by the several States, when these articles
were submitted for their ratification, not one is found which
alludes to the great and radical error which on actual trial has
discovered itself. And if we except the observations which New
Jersey was led to make, rather by her local situation, than by her
peculiar foresight, it may be questioned whether a single suggestion
was of sufficient moment to justify a revision of the system. There
is abundant reason, nevertheless, to suppose that immaterial as
these objections were, they would have been adhered to with a very
dangerous inflexibility, in some States, had not a zeal for their
opinions and supposed interests been stifled by the more powerful
sentiment of selfpreservation. One State, we may remember,
persisted for several years in refusing her concurrence, although
the enemy remained the whole period at our gates, or rather in the
very bowels of our country. Nor was her pliancy in the end effected
by a less motive, than the fear of being chargeable with protracting
the public calamities, and endangering the event of the contest.
Every candid reader will make the proper reflections on these
important facts.

A patient who finds his disorder daily growing worse, and that
an efficacious remedy can no longer be delayed without extreme
danger, after coolly revolving his situation, and the characters of
different physicians, selects and calls in such of them as he judges
most capable of administering relief, and best entitled to his
confidence. The physicians attend; the case of the patient is
carefully examined; a consultation is held; they are unanimously
agreed that the symptoms are critical, but that the case, with
proper and timely relief, is so far from being desperate, that it
may be made to issue in an improvement of his constitution. They
are equally unanimous in prescribing the remedy, by which this happy
effect is to be produced. The prescription is no sooner made known,
however, than a number of persons interpose, and, without denying
the reality or danger of the disorder, assure the patient that the
prescription will be poison to his constitution, and forbid him,
under pain of certain death, to make use of it. Might not the
patient reasonably demand, before he ventured to follow this advice,
that the authors of it should at least agree among themselves on
some other remedy to be substituted? And if he found them differing
as much from one another as from his first counsellors, would he not
act prudently in trying the experiment unanimously recommended by
the latter, rather than be hearkening to those who could neither
deny the necessity of a speedy remedy, nor agree in proposing one?

Such a patient and in such a situation is America at this moment.
She has been sensible of her malady. She has obtained a regular
and unanimous advice from men of her own deliberate choice. And she
is warned by others against following this advice under pain of the
most fatal consequences. Do the monitors deny the reality of her
danger? No. Do they deny the necessity of some speedy and powerful
remedy? No. Are they agreed, are any two of them agreed, in their
objections to the remedy proposed, or in the proper one to be
substituted? Let them speak for themselves. This one tells us that
the proposed Constitution ought to be rejected, because it is not a
confederation of the States, but a government over individuals.
Another admits that it ought to be a government over individuals to
a certain extent, but by no means to the extent proposed. A third
does not object to the government over individuals, or to the extent
proposed, but to the want of a bill of rights. A fourth concurs in
the absolute necessity of a bill of rights, but contends that it
ought to be declaratory, not of the personal rights of individuals,
but of the rights reserved to the States in their political capacity.
A fifth is of opinion that a bill of rights of any sort would be
superfluous and misplaced, and that the plan would be
unexceptionable but for the fatal power of regulating the times and
places of election. An objector in a large State exclaims loudly
against the unreasonable equality of representation in the Senate.
An objector in a small State is equally loud against the dangerous
inequality in the House of Representatives. From this quarter, we
are alarmed with the amazing expense, from the number of persons who
are to administer the new government. From another quarter, and
sometimes from the same quarter, on another occasion, the cry is
that the Congress will be but a shadow of a representation, and that
the government would be far less objectionable if the number and the
expense were doubled. A patriot in a State that does not import or
export, discerns insuperable objections against the power of direct
taxation. The patriotic adversary in a State of great exports and
imports, is not less dissatisfied that the whole burden of taxes may
be thrown on consumption. This politician discovers in the
Constitution a direct and irresistible tendency to monarchy; that
is equally sure it will end in aristocracy. Another is puzzled to
say which of these shapes it will ultimately assume, but sees
clearly it must be one or other of them; whilst a fourth is not
wanting, who with no less confidence affirms that the Constitution
is so far from having a bias towards either of these dangers, that
the weight on that side will not be sufficient to keep it upright
and firm against its opposite propensities. With another class of
adversaries to the Constitution the language is that the
legislative, executive, and judiciary departments are intermixed in
such a manner as to contradict all the ideas of regular government
and all the requisite precautions in favor of liberty. Whilst this
objection circulates in vague and general expressions, there are but
a few who lend their sanction to it. Let each one come forward with
his particular explanation, and scarce any two are exactly agreed
upon the subject. In the eyes of one the junction of the Senate
with the President in the responsible function of appointing to
offices, instead of vesting this executive power in the Executive
alone, is the vicious part of the organization. To another, the
exclusion of the House of Representatives, whose numbers alone could
be a due security against corruption and partiality in the exercise
of such a power, is equally obnoxious. With another, the admission
of the President into any share of a power which ever must be a
dangerous engine in the hands of the executive magistrate, is an
unpardonable violation of the maxims of republican jealousy. No
part of the arrangement, according to some, is more inadmissible
than the trial of impeachments by the Senate, which is alternately a
member both of the legislative and executive departments, when this
power so evidently belonged to the judiciary department. "We
concur fully," reply others, "in the objection to this part of the
plan, but we can never agree that a reference of impeachments to the
judiciary authority would be an amendment of the error. Our
principal dislike to the organization arises from the extensive
powers already lodged in that department." Even among the zealous
patrons of a council of state the most irreconcilable variance is
discovered concerning the mode in which it ought to be constituted.
The demand of one gentleman is, that the council should consist of
a small number to be appointed by the most numerous branch of the
legislature. Another would prefer a larger number, and considers it
as a fundamental condition that the appointment should be made by
the President himself.

As it can give no umbrage to the writers against the plan of the
federal Constitution, let us suppose, that as they are the most
zealous, so they are also the most sagacious, of those who think the
late convention were unequal to the task assigned them, and that a
wiser and better plan might and ought to be substituted. Let us
further suppose that their country should concur, both in this
favorable opinion of their merits, and in their unfavorable opinion
of the convention; and should accordingly proceed to form them into
a second convention, with full powers, and for the express purpose
of revising and remoulding the work of the first. Were the
experiment to be seriously made, though it required some effort to
view it seriously even in fiction, I leave it to be decided by the
sample of opinions just exhibited, whether, with all their enmity to
their predecessors, they would, in any one point, depart so widely
from their example, as in the discord and ferment that would mark
their own deliberations; and whether the Constitution, now before
the public, would not stand as fair a chance for immortality, as
Lycurgus gave to that of Sparta, by making its change to depend on
his own return from exile and death, if it were to be immediately
adopted, and were to continue in force, not until a BETTER, but
until ANOTHER should be agreed upon by this new assembly of
lawgivers.

It is a matter both of wonder and regret, that those who raise
so many objections against the new Constitution should never call to
mind the defects of that which is to be exchanged for it. It is not
necessary that the former should be perfect; it is sufficient that
the latter is more imperfect. No man would refuse to give brass for
silver or gold, because the latter had some alloy in it. No man
would refuse to quit a shattered and tottering habitation for a firm
and commodious building, because the latter had not a porch to it,
or because some of the rooms might be a little larger or smaller, or
the ceilings a little higher or lower than his fancy would have
planned them. But waiving illustrations of this sort, is it not
manifest that most of the capital objections urged against the new
system lie with tenfold weight against the existing Confederation?
Is an indefinite power to raise money dangerous in the hands of the
federal government? The present Congress can make requisitions to
any amount they please, and the States are constitutionally bound to
furnish them; they can emit bills of credit as long as they will
pay for the paper; they can borrow, both abroad and at home, as
long as a shilling will be lent. Is an indefinite power to raise
troops dangerous? The Confederation gives to Congress that power
also; and they have already begun to make use of it. Is it
improper and unsafe to intermix the different powers of government
in the same body of men? Congress, a single body of men, are the
sole depositary of all the federal powers. Is it particularly
dangerous to give the keys of the treasury, and the command of the
army, into the same hands? The Confederation places them both in
the hands of Congress. Is a bill of rights essential to liberty?
The Confederation has no bill of rights. Is it an objection
against the new Constitution, that it empowers the Senate, with the
concurrence of the Executive, to make treaties which are to be the
laws of the land? The existing Congress, without any such control,
can make treaties which they themselves have declared, and most of
the States have recognized, to be the supreme law of the land. Is
the importation of slaves permitted by the new Constitution for
twenty years? By the old it is permitted forever.

I shall be told, that however dangerous this mixture of powers
may be in theory, it is rendered harmless by the dependence of
Congress on the State for the means of carrying them into practice;
that however large the mass of powers may be, it is in fact a
lifeless mass. Then, say I, in the first place, that the
Confederation is chargeable with the still greater folly of
declaring certain powers in the federal government to be absolutely
necessary, and at the same time rendering them absolutely nugatory;
and, in the next place, that if the Union is to continue, and no
better government be substituted, effective powers must either be
granted to, or assumed by, the existing Congress; in either of
which events, the contrast just stated will hold good. But this is
not all. Out of this lifeless mass has already grown an excrescent
power, which tends to realize all the dangers that can be
apprehended from a defective construction of the supreme government
of the Union. It is now no longer a point of speculation and hope,
that the Western territory is a mine of vast wealth to the United
States; and although it is not of such a nature as to extricate
them from their present distresses, or for some time to come, to
yield any regular supplies for the public expenses, yet must it
hereafter be able, under proper management, both to effect a gradual
discharge of the domestic debt, and to furnish, for a certain
period, liberal tributes to the federal treasury. A very large
proportion of this fund has been already surrendered by individual
States; and it may with reason be expected that the remaining
States will not persist in withholding similar proofs of their
equity and generosity. We may calculate, therefore, that a rich and
fertile country, of an area equal to the inhabited extent of the
United States, will soon become a national stock. Congress have
assumed the administration of this stock. They have begun to render
it productive. Congress have undertaken to do more: they have
proceeded to form new States, to erect temporary governments, to
appoint officers for them, and to prescribe the conditions on which
such States shall be admitted into the Confederacy. All this has
been done; and done without the least color of constitutional
authority. Yet no blame has been whispered; no alarm has been
sounded. A GREAT and INDEPENDENT fund of revenue is passing into
the hands of a SINGLE BODY of men, who can RAISE TROOPS to an
INDEFINITE NUMBER, and appropriate money to their support for an
INDEFINITE PERIOD OF TIME. And yet there are men, who have not only
been silent spectators of this prospect, but who are advocates for
the system which exhibits it; and, at the same time, urge against
the new system the objections which we have heard. Would they not
act with more consistency, in urging the establishment of the
latter, as no less necessary to guard the Union against the future
powers and resources of a body constructed like the existing
Congress, than to save it from the dangers threatened by the present
impotency of that Assembly?

I mean not, by any thing here said, to throw censure on the
measures which have been pursued by Congress. I am sensible they
could not have done otherwise. The public interest, the necessity
of the case, imposed upon them the task of overleaping their
constitutional limits. But is not the fact an alarming proof of the
danger resulting from a government which does not possess regular
powers commensurate to its objects? A dissolution or usurpation is
the dreadful dilemma to which it is continually exposed.

To the People of the State of New York:

THE last paper having concluded the observations which were
meant to introduce a candid survey of the plan of government
reported by the convention, we now proceed to the execution of that
part of our undertaking.

The first question that offers itself is, whether the general
form and aspect of the government be strictly republican. It is
evident that no other form would be reconcilable with the genius of
the people of America; with the fundamental principles of the
Revolution; or with that honorable determination which animates
every votary of freedom, to rest all our political experiments on
the capacity of mankind for self-government. If the plan of the
convention, therefore, be found to depart from the republican
character, its advocates must abandon it as no longer defensible.

What, then, are the distinctive characters of the republican
form? Were an answer to this question to be sought, not by
recurring to principles, but in the application of the term by
political writers, to the constitution of different States, no
satisfactory one would ever be found. Holland, in which no particle
of the supreme authority is derived from the people, has passed
almost universally under the denomination of a republic. The same
title has been bestowed on Venice, where absolute power over the
great body of the people is exercised, in the most absolute manner,
by a small body of hereditary nobles. Poland, which is a mixture of
aristocracy and of monarchy in their worst forms, has been dignified
with the same appellation. The government of England, which has one
republican branch only, combined with an hereditary aristocracy and
monarchy, has, with equal impropriety, been frequently placed on the
list of republics. These examples, which are nearly as dissimilar
to each other as to a genuine republic, show the extreme inaccuracy
with which the term has been used in political disquisitions.

If we resort for a criterion to the different principles on
which different forms of government are established, we may define a
republic to be, or at least may bestow that name on, a government
which derives all its powers directly or indirectly from the great
body of the people, and is administered by persons holding their
offices during pleasure, for a limited period, or during good
behavior. It is ESSENTIAL to such a government that it be derived
from the great body of the society, not from an inconsiderable
proportion, or a favored class of it; otherwise a handful of
tyrannical nobles, exercising their oppressions by a delegation of
their powers, might aspire to the rank of republicans, and claim for
their government the honorable title of republic. It is SUFFICIENT
for such a government that the persons administering it be
appointed, either directly or indirectly, by the people; and that
they hold their appointments by either of the tenures just
specified; otherwise every government in the United States, as well
as every other popular government that has been or can be well
organized or well executed, would be degraded from the republican
character. According to the constitution of every State in the
Union, some or other of the officers of government are appointed
indirectly only by the people. According to most of them, the chief
magistrate himself is so appointed. And according to one, this mode
of appointment is extended to one of the co-ordinate branches of the
legislature. According to all the constitutions, also, the tenure
of the highest offices is extended to a definite period, and in many
instances, both within the legislative and executive departments, to
a period of years. According to the provisions of most of the
constitutions, again, as well as according to the most respectable
and received opinions on the subject, the members of the judiciary
department are to retain their offices by the firm tenure of good
behavior.

On comparing the Constitution planned by the convention with the
standard here fixed, we perceive at once that it is, in the most
rigid sense, conformable to it. The House of Representatives, like
that of one branch at least of all the State legislatures, is
elected immediately by the great body of the people. The Senate,
like the present Congress, and the Senate of Maryland, derives its
appointment indirectly from the people. The President is indirectly
derived from the choice of the people, according to the example in
most of the States. Even the judges, with all other officers of the
Union, will, as in the several States, be the choice, though a
remote choice, of the people themselves, the duration of the
appointments is equally conformable to the republican standard, and
to the model of State constitutions The House of Representatives is
periodically elective, as in all the States; and for the period of
two years, as in the State of South Carolina. The Senate is
elective, for the period of six years; which is but one year more
than the period of the Senate of Maryland, and but two more than
that of the Senates of New York and Virginia. The President is to
continue in office for the period of four years; as in New York and
Delaware, the chief magistrate is elected for three years, and in
South Carolina for two years. In the other States the election is
annual. In several of the States, however, no constitutional
provision is made for the impeachment of the chief magistrate. And
in Delaware and Virginia he is not impeachable till out of office.
The President of the United States is impeachable at any time
during his continuance in office. The tenure by which the judges
are to hold their places, is, as it unquestionably ought to be, that
of good behavior. The tenure of the ministerial offices generally,
will be a subject of legal regulation, conformably to the reason of
the case and the example of the State constitutions.

Could any further proof be required of the republican complexion
of this system, the most decisive one might be found in its absolute
prohibition of titles of nobility, both under the federal and the
State governments; and in its express guaranty of the republican
form to each of the latter.

"But it was not sufficient," say the adversaries of the
proposed Constitution, "for the convention to adhere to the
republican form. They ought, with equal care, to have preserved the
FEDERAL form, which regards the Union as a CONFEDERACY of sovereign
states; instead of which, they have framed a NATIONAL government,
which regards the Union as a CONSOLIDATION of the States." And it
is asked by what authority this bold and radical innovation was
undertaken? The handle which has been made of this objection
requires that it should be examined with some precision.

Without inquiring into the accuracy of the distinction on which
the objection is founded, it will be necessary to a just estimate of
its force, first, to ascertain the real character of the government
in question; secondly, to inquire how far the convention were
authorized to propose such a government; and thirdly, how far the
duty they owed to their country could supply any defect of regular
authority.

First. In order to ascertain the real character of the
government, it may be considered in relation to the foundation on
which it is to be established; to the sources from which its
ordinary powers are to be drawn; to the operation of those powers;
to the extent of them; and to the authority by which future
changes in the government are to be introduced.

On examining the first relation, it appears, on one hand, that
the Constitution is to be founded on the assent and ratification of
the people of America, given by deputies elected for the special
purpose; but, on the other, that this assent and ratification is to
be given by the people, not as individuals composing one entire
nation, but as composing the distinct and independent States to
which they respectively belong. It is to be the assent and
ratification of the several States, derived from the supreme
authority in each State, the authority of the people themselves.
The act, therefore, establishing the Constitution, will not be a
NATIONAL, but a FEDERAL act.

That it will be a federal and not a national act, as these terms
are understood by the objectors; the act of the people, as forming
so many independent States, not as forming one aggregate nation, is
obvious from this single consideration, that it is to result neither
from the decision of a MAJORITY of the people of the Union, nor from
that of a MAJORITY of the States. It must result from the UNANIMOUS
assent of the several States that are parties to it, differing no
otherwise from their ordinary assent than in its being expressed,
not by the legislative authority, but by that of the people
themselves. Were the people regarded in this transaction as forming
one nation, the will of the majority of the whole people of the
United States would bind the minority, in the same manner as the
majority in each State must bind the minority; and the will of the
majority must be determined either by a comparison of the individual
votes, or by considering the will of the majority of the States as
evidence of the will of a majority of the people of the United
States. Neither of these rules have been adopted. Each State, in
ratifying the Constitution, is considered as a sovereign body,
independent of all others, and only to be bound by its own voluntary
act. In this relation, then, the new Constitution will, if
established, be a FEDERAL, and not a NATIONAL constitution.

The next relation is, to the sources from which the ordinary
powers of government are to be derived. The House of
Representatives will derive its powers from the people of America;
and the people will be represented in the same proportion, and on
the same principle, as they are in the legislature of a particular
State. So far the government is NATIONAL, not FEDERAL. The Senate,
on the other hand, will derive its powers from the States, as
political and coequal societies; and these will be represented on
the principle of equality in the Senate, as they now are in the
existing Congress. So far the government is FEDERAL, not NATIONAL.
The executive power will be derived from a very compound source.
The immediate election of the President is to be made by the States
in their political characters. The votes allotted to them are in a
compound ratio, which considers them partly as distinct and coequal
societies, partly as unequal members of the same society. The
eventual election, again, is to be made by that branch of the
legislature which consists of the national representatives; but in
this particular act they are to be thrown into the form of
individual delegations, from so many distinct and coequal bodies
politic. From this aspect of the government it appears to be of a
mixed character, presenting at least as many FEDERAL as NATIONAL
features.

The difference between a federal and national government, as it
relates to the OPERATION OF THE GOVERNMENT, is supposed to consist
in this, that in the former the powers operate on the political
bodies composing the Confederacy, in their political capacities; in
the latter, on the individual citizens composing the nation, in
their individual capacities. On trying the Constitution by this
criterion, it falls under the NATIONAL, not the FEDERAL character;
though perhaps not so completely as has been understood. In
several cases, and particularly in the trial of controversies to
which States may be parties, they must be viewed and proceeded
against in their collective and political capacities only. So far
the national countenance of the government on this side seems to be
disfigured by a few federal features. But this blemish is perhaps
unavoidable in any plan; and the operation of the government on the
people, in their individual capacities, in its ordinary and most
essential proceedings, may, on the whole, designate it, in this
relation, a NATIONAL government.

But if the government be national with regard to the OPERATION
of its powers, it changes its aspect again when we contemplate it in
relation to the EXTENT of its powers. The idea of a national
government involves in it, not only an authority over the individual
citizens, but an indefinite supremacy over all persons and things,
so far as they are objects of lawful government. Among a people
consolidated into one nation, this supremacy is completely vested in
the national legislature. Among communities united for particular
purposes, it is vested partly in the general and partly in the
municipal legislatures. In the former case, all local authorities
are subordinate to the supreme; and may be controlled, directed, or
abolished by it at pleasure. In the latter, the local or municipal
authorities form distinct and independent portions of the supremacy,
no more subject, within their respective spheres, to the general
authority, than the general authority is subject to them, within its
own sphere. In this relation, then, the proposed government cannot
be deemed a NATIONAL one; since its jurisdiction extends to certain
enumerated objects only, and leaves to the several States a
residuary and inviolable sovereignty over all other objects. It is
true that in controversies relating to the boundary between the two
jurisdictions, the tribunal which is ultimately to decide, is to be
established under the general government. But this does not change
the principle of the case. The decision is to be impartially made,
according to the rules of the Constitution; and all the usual and
most effectual precautions are taken to secure this impartiality.
Some such tribunal is clearly essential to prevent an appeal to the
sword and a dissolution of the compact; and that it ought to be
established under the general rather than under the local
governments, or, to speak more properly, that it could be safely
established under the first alone, is a position not likely to be
combated.

If we try the Constitution by its last relation to the authority
by which amendments are to be made, we find it neither wholly
NATIONAL nor wholly FEDERAL. Were it wholly national, the supreme
and ultimate authority would reside in the MAJORITY of the people of
the Union; and this authority would be competent at all times, like
that of a majority of every national society, to alter or abolish
its established government. Were it wholly federal, on the other
hand, the concurrence of each State in the Union would be essential
to every alteration that would be binding on all. The mode provided
by the plan of the convention is not founded on either of these
principles. In requiring more than a majority, and principles. In
requiring more than a majority, and particularly in computing the
proportion by STATES, not by CITIZENS, it departs from the NATIONAL
and advances towards the FEDERAL character; in rendering the
concurrence of less than the whole number of States sufficient, it
loses again the FEDERAL and partakes of the NATIONAL character.

The proposed Constitution, therefore, is, in strictness, neither
a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both.
In its foundation it is federal, not national; in the sources from
which the ordinary powers of the government are drawn, it is partly
federal and partly national; in the operation of these powers, it
is national, not federal; in the extent of them, again, it is
federal, not national; and, finally, in the authoritative mode of
introducing amendments, it is neither wholly federal nor wholly
national.

To the People of the State of New York:

THE SECOND point to be examined is, whether the convention were

authorized to frame and propose this mixed Constitution. The

powers of the convention ought, in strictness, to be determined

by an inspection of the commissions given to the members by their

respective constituents. As all of these, however, had reference,

either to the recommendation from the meeting at Annapolis, in

September, 1786, or to that from Congress, in February, 1787, it

will be sufficient to recur to these particular acts. The act

from Annapolis recommends the "appointment of commissioners to

take into consideration the situation of the United States; to

devise SUCH FURTHER PROVISIONS as shall appear to them necessary

to render the Constitution of the federal government ADEQUATE TO

THE EXIGENCIES OF THE UNION; and to report such an act for that

purpose, to the United States in Congress assembled, as when

agreed to by them, and afterwards confirmed by the legislature of

every State, will effectually provide for the same. "The

recommendatory act of Congress is in the words

following:"WHEREAS, There is provision in the articles of

Confederation and perpetual Union, for making alterations

therein, by the assent of a Congress of the United States, and of

the legislatures of the several States; and whereas experience

hath evinced, that there are defects in the present

Confederation; as a mean to remedy which, several of the States,

and PARTICULARLY THE STATE OF NEW YORK, by express instructions

to their delegates in Congress, have suggested a convention for

the purposes expressed in the following resolution; and such

convention appearing to be the most probable mean of establishing

in these States A FIRM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT:"Resolved, That in

the opinion of Congress it is expedient, that on the second

Monday of May next a convention of delegates, who shall have been

appointed by the several States, be held at Philadelphia, for the

sole and express purpose OF REVISING THE ARTICLES OF

CONFEDERATION, and reporting to Congress and the several

legislatures such ALTERATIONS AND PROVISIONS THEREIN, as shall,

when agreed to in Congress, and confirmed by the States, render

the federal Constitution ADEQUATE TO THE EXIGENCIES OF GOVERNMENT

AND THE PRESERVATION OF THE UNION. "From these two acts, it

appears, 1st, that the object of the convention was to establish,

in these States, A FIRM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT; 2d, that this

government was to be such as would be ADEQUATE TO THE EXIGENCIES

OF GOVERNMENT and THE PRESERVATION OF THE UNION; 3d, that these

purposes were to be effected by ALTERATIONS AND PROVISIONS IN THE

ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION, as it is expressed in the act of

Congress, or by SUCH FURTHER PROVISIONS AS SHOULD APPEAR

NECESSARY, as it stands in the recommendatory act from Annapolis;

4th, that the alterations and provisions were to be reported to

Congress, and to the States, in order to be agreed to by the

former and confirmed by the latter. From a comparison and fair

construction of these several modes of expression, is to be

deduced the authority under which the convention acted. They were

to frame a NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, adequate to the EXIGENCIES OF

GOVERNMENT, and OF THE UNION; and to reduce the articles of

Confederation into such form as to accomplish these purposes.

There are two rules of construction, dictated by plain reason, as

well as founded on legal axioms. The one is, that every part of

the expression ought, if possible, to be allowed some meaning,

and be made to conspire to some common end. The other is, that

where the several parts cannot be made to coincide, the less

important should give way to the more important part; the means

should be sacrificed to the end, rather than the end to the

means. Suppose, then, that the expressions defining the

authority of the convention were irreconcilably at variance with

each other; that a NATIONAL and ADEQUATE GOVERNMENT could not

possibly, in the judgment of the convention, be affected by

ALTERATIONS and PROVISIONS in the ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION;

which part of the definition ought to have been embraced, and

which rejected? Which was the more important, which the less

important part? Which the end; which the means? Let the most

scrupulous expositors of delegated powers; let the most

inveterate objectors against those exercised by the convention,

answer these questions. Let them declare, whether it was of most

importance to the happiness of the people of America, that the

articles of Confederation should be disregarded, and an adequate

government be provided, and the Union preserved; or that an

adequate government should be omitted, and the articles of

Confederation preserved. Let them declare, whether the

preservation of these articles was the end, for securing which a

reform of the government was to be introduced as the means; or

whether the establishment of a government, adequate to the

national happiness, was the end at which these articles

themselves originally aimed, and to which they ought, as

insufficient means, to have been sacrificed. But is it necessary

to suppose that these expressions are absolutely irreconcilable

to each other; that no ALTERATIONS or PROVISIONS in THE ARTICLES

OF THE CONFEDERATION could possibly mould them into a national

and adequate government; into such a government as has been

proposed by the convention? No stress, it is presumed, will, in

this case, be laid on the TITLE; a change of that could never be

deemed an exercise of ungranted power. ALTERATIONS in the body of

the instrument are expressly authorized. NEW PROVISIONS therein

are also expressly authorized. Here then is a power to change the

title; to insert new articles; to alter old ones. Must it of

necessity be admitted that this power is infringed, so long as a

part of the old articles remain? Those who maintain the

affirmative ought at least to mark the boundary between

authorized and usurped innovations; between that degree of change

which lies within the compass of ALTERATIONS AND FURTHER

PROVISIONS, and that which amounts to a TRANSMUTATION of the

government. Will it be said that the alterations ought not to

have touched the substance of the Confederation? The States

would never have appointed a convention with so much solemnity,

nor described its objects with so much latitude, if some

SUBSTANTIAL reform had not been in contemplation. Will it be said

that the FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES of the Confederation were not

within the purview of the convention, and ought not to have been

varied? I ask, What are these principles? Do they require that,

in the establishment of the Constitution, the States should be

regarded as distinct and independent sovereigns? They are so

regarded by the Constitution proposed. Do they require that the

members of the government should derive their appointment from

the legislatures, not from the people of the States? One branch

of the new government is to be appointed by these legislatures;

and under the Confederation, the delegates to Congress MAY ALL

be appointed immediately by the people, and in two States1 are

actually so appointed. Do they require that the powers of the

government should act on the States, and not immediately on

individuals? In some instances, as has been shown, the powers of

the new government will act on the States in their collective

characters. In some instances, also, those of the existing

government act immediately on individuals. In cases of capture;

of piracy; of the post office; of coins, weights, and measures;

of trade with the Indians; of claims under grants of land by

different States; and, above all, in the case of trials by

courts-marshal in the army and navy, by which death may be

inflicted without the intervention of a jury, or even of a civil

magistrate; in all these cases the powers of the Confederation

operate immediately on the persons and interests of individual

citizens. Do these fundamental principles require, particularly,

that no tax should be levied without the intermediate agency of

the States? The Confederation itself authorizes a direct tax, to

a certain extent, on the post office. The power of coinage has

been so construed by Congress as to levy a tribute immediately

from that source also. But pretermitting these instances, was it

not an acknowledged object of the convention and the universal

expectation of the people, that the regulation of trade should be

submitted to the general government in such a form as would

render it an immediate source of general revenue? Had not

Congress repeatedly recommended this measure as not inconsistent

with the fundamental principles of the Confederation? Had not

every State but one; had not New York herself, so far complied

with the plan of Congress as to recognize the PRINCIPLE of the

innovation? Do these principles, in fine, require that the

powers of the general government should be limited, and that,

beyond this limit, the States should be left in possession of

their sovereignty and independence? We have seen that in the new

government, as in the old, the general powers are limited; and

that the States, in all unenumerated cases, are left in the

enjoyment of their sovereign and independent jurisdiction. The

truth is, that the great principles of the Constitution proposed

by the convention may be considered less as absolutely new, than

as the expansion of principles which are found in the articles of

Confederation. The misfortune under the latter system has been,

that these principles are so feeble and confined as to justify

all the charges of inefficiency which have been urged against it,

and to require a degree of enlargement which gives to the new

system the aspect of an entire transformation of the old. In one

particular it is admitted that the convention have departed from

the tenor of their commission. Instead of reporting a plan

requiring the confirmation OF THE LEGISLATURES OF ALL THE STATES,

they have reported a plan which is to be confirmed by the PEOPLE,

and may be carried into effect by NINE STATES ONLY. It is worthy

of remark that this objection, though the most plausible, has

been the least urged in the publications which have swarmed

against the convention. The forbearance can only have proceeded

from an irresistible conviction of the absurdity of subjecting

the fate of twelve States to the perverseness or corruption of a

thirteenth; from the example of inflexible opposition given by a

MAJORITY of one sixtieth of the people of America to a measure

approved and called for by the voice of twelve States, comprising

fifty-nine sixtieths of the people an example still fresh in the

memory and indignation of every citizen who has felt for the

wounded honor and prosperity of his country. As this objection,

therefore, has been in a manner waived by those who have

criticised the powers of the convention, I dismiss it without

further observation. The THIRD point to be inquired into is, how

far considerations of duty arising out of the case itself could

have supplied any defect of regular authority. In the preceding

inquiries the powers of the convention have been analyzed and

tried with the same rigor, and by the same rules, as if they had

been real and final powers for the establishment of a

Constitution for the United States. We have seen in what manner

they have borne the trial even on that supposition. It is time

now to recollect that the powers were merely advisory and

recommendatory; that they were so meant by the States, and so

understood by the convention; and that the latter have

accordingly planned and proposed a Constitution which is to be of

no more consequence than the paper on which it is written, unless

it be stamped with the approbation of those to whom it is

addressed. This reflection places the subject in a point of view

altogether different, and will enable us to judge with propriety

of the course taken by the convention. Let us view the ground on

which the convention stood. It may be collected from their

proceedings, that they were deeply and unanimously impressed with

the crisis, which had led their country almost with one voice to

make so singular and solemn an experiment for correcting the

errors of a system by which this crisis had been produced; that

they were no less deeply and unanimously convinced that such a

reform as they have proposed was absolutely necessary to effect

the purposes of their appointment. It could not be unknown to

them that the hopes and expectations of the great body of

citizens, throughout this great empire, were turned with the

keenest anxiety to the event of their deliberations. They had

every reason to believe that the contrary sentiments agitated the

minds and bosoms of every external and internal foe to the

liberty and prosperity of the United States. They had seen in the

origin and progress of the experiment, the alacrity with which

the PROPOSITION, made by a single State (Virginia), towards a

partial amendment of the Confederation, had been attended to and

promoted. They had seen the LIBERTY ASSUMED by a VERY FEW

deputies from a VERY FEW States, convened at Annapolis, of

recommending a great and critical object, wholly foreign to their

commission, not only justified by the public opinion, but

actually carried into effect by twelve out of the thirteen

States. They had seen, in a variety of instances, assumptions by

Congress, not only of recommendatory, but of operative, powers,

warranted, in the public estimation, by occasions and objects

infinitely less urgent than those by which their conduct was to

be governed. They must have reflected, that in all great changes

of established governments, forms ought to give way to substance;

that a rigid adherence in such cases to the former, would render

nominal and nugatory the transcendent and precious right of the

people to "abolish or alter their governments as to them shall

seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness,"2 since

it is impossible for the people spontaneously and universally to

move in concert towards their object; and it is therefore

essential that such changes be instituted by some INFORMAL AND

UNAUTHORIZED PROPOSITIONS, made by some patriotic and respectable

citizen or number of citizens. They must have recollected that it

was by this irregular and assumed privilege of proposing to the

people plans for their safety and happiness, that the States

were first united against the danger with which they were

threatened by their ancient government; that committees and

congresses were formed for concentrating their efforts and

defending their rights; and that CONVENTIONS were ELECTED in THE

SEVERAL STATES for establishing the constitutions under which

they are now governed; nor could it have been forgotten that no

little ill-timed scruples, no zeal for adhering to ordinary

forms, were anywhere seen, except in those who wished to indulge,

under these masks, their secret enmity to the substance contended

for. They must have borne in mind, that as the plan to be framed

and proposed was to be submitted TO THE PEOPLE THEMSELVES, the

disapprobation of this supreme authority would destroy it

forever; its approbation blot out antecedent errors and

irregularities. It might even have occurred to them, that where a

disposition to cavil prevailed, their neglect to execute the

degree of power vested in them, and still more their

recommendation of any measure whatever, not warranted by their

commission, would not less excite animadversion, than a

recommendation at once of a measure fully commensurate to the

national exigencies. Had the convention, under all these

impressions, and in the midst of all these considerations,

instead of exercising a manly confidence in their country, by

whose confidence they had been so peculiarly distinguished, and

of pointing out a system capable, in their judgment, of securing

its happiness, taken the cold and sullen resolution of

disappointing its ardent hopes, of sacrificing substance to

forms, of committing the dearest interests of their country to

the uncertainties of delay and the hazard of events, let me ask

the man who can raise his mind to one elevated conception, who

can awaken in his bosom one patriotic emotion, what judgment

ought to have been pronounced by the impartial world, by the

friends of mankind, by every virtuous citizen, on the conduct and

character of this assembly? Or if there be a man whose

propensity to condemn is susceptible of no control, let me then

ask what sentence he has in reserve for the twelve States who

USURPED THE POWER of sending deputies to the convention, a body

utterly unknown to their constitutions; for Congress, who

recommended the appointment of this body, equally unknown to the

Confederation; and for the State of New York, in particular,

which first urged and then complied with this unauthorized

interposition? But that the objectors may be disarmed of every

pretext, it shall be granted for a moment that the convention

were neither authorized by their commission, nor justified by

circumstances in proposing a Constitution for their country: does

it follow that the Constitution ought, for that reason alone, to

be rejected? If, according to the noble precept, it be lawful to

accept good advice even from an enemy, shall we set the ignoble

example of refusing such advice even when it is offered by our

friends? The prudent inquiry, in all cases, ought surely to be,

not so much FROM WHOM the advice comes, as whether the advice be

GOOD. The sum of what has been here advanced and proved is, that

the charge against the convention of exceeding their powers,

except in one instance little urged by the objectors, has no

foundation to support it; that if they had exceeded their powers,

they were not only warranted, but required, as the confidential

servants of their country, by the circumstances in which they

were placed, to exercise the liberty which they assume; and that

finally, if they had violated both their powers and their

obligations, in proposing a Constitution, this ought nevertheless

to be embraced, if it be calculated to accomplish the views and

happiness of the people of America. How far this character is due

to the Constitution, is the subject under investigation.

To the People of the State of New York:

THE Constitution proposed by the convention may be considered

under two general points of view. The FIRST relates to the sum or

quantity of power which it vests in the government, including

the restraints imposed on the States. The SECOND, to the

particular structure of the government, and the distribution of

this power among its several branches. Under the FIRST view of

the subject, two important questions arise: 1. Whether any part

of the powers transferred to the general government be

unnecessary or improper? 2. Whether the entire mass of them be

dangerous to the portion of jurisdiction left in the several

States? Is the aggregate power of the general government greater

than ought to have been vested in it? This is the FIRST

question. It cannot have escaped those who have attended with

candor to the arguments employed against the extensive powers of

the government, that the authors of them have very little

considered how far these powers were necessary means of attaining

a necessary end. They have chosen rather to dwell on the

inconveniences which must be unavoidably blended with all

political advantages; and on the possible abuses which must be

incident to every power or trust, of which a beneficial use can

be made. This method of handling the subject cannot impose on the

good sense of the people of America. It may display the subtlety

of the writer; it may open a boundless field for rhetoric and

declamation; it may inflame the passions of the unthinking, and

may confirm the prejudices of the misthinking: but cool and

candid people will at once reflect, that the purest of human

blessings must have a portion of alloy in them; that the choice

must always be made, if not of the lesser evil, at least of the

GREATER, not the PERFECT, good; and that in every political

institution, a power to advance the public happiness involves a

discretion which may be misapplied and abused. They will see,

therefore, that in all cases where power is to be conferred, the

point first to be decided is, whether such a power be necessary

to the public good; as the next will be, in case of an

affirmative decision, to guard as effectually as possible

against a perversion of the power to the public detriment. That

we may form a correct judgment on this subject, it will be proper

to review the several powers conferred on the government of the

Union; and that this may be the more conveniently done they may

be reduced into different classes as they relate to the following

different objects: 1. Security against foreign danger; 2.

Regulation of the intercourse with foreign nations; 3.

Maintenance of harmony and proper intercourse among the States;

4. Certain miscellaneous objects of general utility; 5.

Restraint of the States from certain injurious acts; 6.

Provisions for giving due efficacy to all these powers. The

powers falling within the FIRST class are those of declaring war

and granting letters of marque; of providing armies and fleets;

of regulating and calling forth the militia; of levying and

borrowing money. Security against foreign danger is one of the

primitive objects of civil society. It is an avowed and essential

object of the American Union. The powers requisite for attaining

it must be effectually confided to the federal councils. Is the

power of declaring war necessary? No man will answer this

question in the negative. It would be superfluous, therefore, to

enter into a proof of the affirmative. The existing Confederation

establishes this power in the most ample form. Is the power of

raising armies and equipping fleets necessary? This is involved

in the foregoing power. It is involved in the power of

self-defense. But was it necessary to give an INDEFINITE POWER

of raising TROOPS, as well as providing fleets; and of

maintaining both in PEACE, as well as in war? The answer to these

questions has been too far anticipated in another place to admit

an extensive discussion of them in this place. The answer indeed

seems to be so obvious and conclusive as scarcely to justify such

a discussion in any place. With what color of propriety could the

force necessary for defense be limited by those who cannot limit

the force of offense? If a federal Constitution could chain the

ambition or set bounds to the exertions of all other nations,

then indeed might it prudently chain the discretion of its own

government, and set bounds to the exertions for its own safety.

How could a readiness for war in time of peace be safely

prohibited, unless we could prohibit, in like manner, the

preparations and establishments of every hostile nation? The

means of security can only be regulated by the means and the

danger of attack. They will, in fact, be ever determined by these

rules, and by no others. It is in vain to oppose constitutional

barriers to the impulse of self-preservation. It is worse than in

vain; because it plants in the Constitution itself necessary

usurpations of power, every precedent of which is a germ of

unnecessary and multiplied repetitions. If one nation maintains

constantly a disciplined army, ready for the service of ambition

or revenge, it obliges the most pacific nations who may be within

the reach of its enterprises to take corresponding precautions.

The fifteenth century was the unhappy epoch of military

establishments in the time of peace. They were introduced by

Charles VII. of France. All Europe has followed, or been forced

into, the example. Had the example not been followed by other

nations, all Europe must long ago have worn the chains of a

universal monarch. Were every nation except France now to disband

its peace establishments, the same event might follow. The

veteran legions of Rome were an overmatch for the undisciplined

valor of all other nations and rendered her the mistress of the

world. Not the less true is it, that the liberties of Rome

proved the final victim to her military triumphs; and that the

liberties of Europe, as far as they ever existed, have, with few

exceptions, been the price of her military establishments. A

standing force, therefore, is a dangerous, at the same time that

it may be a necessary, provision. On the smallest scale it has

its inconveniences. On an extensive scale its consequences may be

fatal. On any scale it is an object of laudable circumspection

and precaution. A wise nation will combine all these

considerations; and, whilst it does not rashly preclude itself

from any resource which may become essential to its safety, will

exert all its prudence in diminishing both the necessity and the

danger of resorting to one which may be inauspicious to its

liberties. The clearest marks of this prudence are stamped on

the proposed Constitution. The Union itself, which it cements and

secures, destroys every pretext for a military establishment

which could be dangerous. America united, with a handful of

troops, or without a single soldier, exhibits a more forbidding

posture to foreign ambition than America disunited, with a

hundred thousand veterans ready for combat. It was remarked, on a

former occasion, that the want of this pretext had saved the

liberties of one nation in Europe. Being rendered by her insular

situation and her maritime resources impregnable to the armies of

her neighbors, the rulers of Great Britain have never been able,

by real or artificial dangers, to cheat the public into an

extensive peace establishment. The distance of the United States

from the powerful nations of the world gives them the same happy

security. A dangerous establishment can never be necessary or

plausible, so long as they continue a united people. But let it

never, for a moment, be forgotten that they are indebted for this

advantage to the Union alone. The moment of its dissolution will

be the date of a new order of things. The fears of the weaker, or

the ambition of the stronger States, or Confederacies, will set

the same example in the New, as Charles VII. did in the Old

World. The example will be followed here from the same motives

which produced universal imitation there. Instead of deriving

from our situation the precious advantage which Great Britain has

derived from hers, the face of America will be but a copy of that

of the continent of Europe. It will present liberty everywhere

crushed between standing armies and perpetual taxes. The fortunes

of disunited America will be even more disastrous than those of

Europe. The sources of evil in the latter are confined to her own

limits. No superior powers of another quarter of the globe

intrigue among her rival nations, inflame their mutual

animosities, and render them the instruments of foreign ambition,

jealousy, and revenge. In America the miseries springing from her

internal jealousies, contentions, and wars, would form a part

only of her lot. A plentiful addition of evils would have their

source in that relation in which Europe stands to this quarter of

the earth, and which no other quarter of the earth bears to

Europe. This picture of the consequences of disunion cannot be

too highly colored, or too often exhibited. Every man who loves

peace, every man who loves his country, every man who loves

liberty, ought to have it ever before his eyes, that he may

cherish in his heart a due attachment to the Union of America,

and be able to set a due value on the means of preserving it.

Next to the effectual establishment of the Union, the best

possible precaution against danger from standing armies is a

limitation of the term for which revenue may be appropriated to

their support. This precaution the Constitution has prudently

added. I will not repeat here the observations which I flatter

myself have placed this subject in a just and satisfactory

light. But it may not be improper to take notice of an argument

against this part of the Constitution, which has been drawn from

the policy and practice of Great Britain. It is said that the

continuance of an army in that kingdom requires an annual vote of

the legislature; whereas the American Constitution has lengthened

this critical period to two years. This is the form in which the

comparison is usually stated to the public: but is it a just

form? Is it a fair comparison? Does the British Constitution

restrain the parliamentary discretion to one year? Does the

American impose on the Congress appropriations for two years? On

the contrary, it cannot be unknown to the authors of the fallacy

themselves, that the British Constitution fixes no limit whatever

to the discretion of the legislature, and that the American ties

down the legislature to two years, as the longest admissible

term. Had the argument from the British example been truly

stated, it would have stood thus: The term for which supplies

may be appropriated to the army establishment, though unlimited

by the British Constitution, has nevertheless, in practice, been

limited by parliamentary discretion to a single year. Now, if in

Great Britain, where the House of Commons is elected for seven

years; where so great a proportion of the members are elected by

so small a proportion of the people; where the electors are so

corrupted by the representatives, and the representatives so

corrupted by the Crown, the representative body can possess a

power to make appropriations to the army for an indefinite term,

without desiring, or without daring, to extend the term beyond a

single year, ought not suspicion herself to blush, in pretending

that the representatives of the United States, elected FREELY by

the WHOLE BODY of the people, every SECOND YEAR, cannot be safely

intrusted with the discretion over such appropriations, expressly

limited to the short period of TWO YEARS? A bad cause seldom

fails to betray itself. Of this truth, the management of the

opposition to the federal government is an unvaried

exemplification. But among all the blunders which have been

committed, none is more striking than the attempt to enlist on

that side the prudent jealousy entertained by the people, of

standing armies. The attempt has awakened fully the public

attention to that important subject; and has led to

investigations which must terminate in a thorough and universal

conviction, not only that the constitution has provided the most

effectual guards against danger from that quarter, but that

nothing short of a Constitution fully adequate to the national

defense and the preservation of the Union, can save America from

as many standing armies as it may be split into States or

Confederacies, and from such a progressive augmentation, of these

establishments in each, as will render them as burdensome to the

properties and ominous to the liberties of the people, as any

establishment that can become necessary, under a united and

efficient government, must be tolerable to the former and safe to

the latter. The palpable necessity of the power to provide and

maintain a navy has protected that part of the Constitution

against a spirit of censure, which has spared few other parts. It

must, indeed, be numbered among the greatest blessings of

America, that as her Union will be the only source of her

maritime strength, so this will be a principal source of her

security against danger from abroad. In this respect our

situation bears another likeness to the insular advantage of

Great Britain. The batteries most capable of repelling foreign

enterprises on our safety, are happily such as can never be

turned by a perfidious government against our liberties. The

inhabitants of the Atlantic frontier are all of them deeply

interested in this provision for naval protection, and if they

have hitherto been suffered to sleep quietly in their beds; if

their property has remained safe against the predatory spirit of

licentious adventurers; if their maritime towns have not yet

been compelled to ransom themselves from the terrors of a

conflagration, by yielding to the exactions of daring and sudden

invaders, these instances of good fortune are not to be ascribed

to the capacity of the existing government for the protection of

those from whom it claims allegiance, but to causes that are

fugitive and fallacious. If we except perhaps Virginia and

Maryland, which are peculiarly vulnerable on their eastern

frontiers, no part of the Union ought to feel more anxiety on

this subject than New York. Her seacoast is extensive. A very

important district of the State is an island. The State itself is

penetrated by a large navigable river for more than fifty

leagues. The great emporium of its commerce, the great reservoir

of its wealth, lies every moment at the mercy of events, and may

almost be regarded as a hostage for ignominious compliances with

the dictates of a foreign enemy, or even with the rapacious

demands of pirates and barbarians. Should a war be the result of

the precarious situation of European affairs, and all the unruly

passions attending it be let loose on the ocean, our escape from

insults and depredations, not only on that element, but every

part of the other bordering on it, will be truly miraculous. In

the present condition of America, the States more immediately

exposed to these calamities have nothing to hope from the phantom

of a general government which now exists; and if their single

resources were equal to the task of fortifying themselves against

the danger, the object to be protected would be almost consumed

by the means of protecting them. The power of regulating and

calling forth the militia has been already sufficiently

vindicated and explained. The power of levying and borrowing

money, being the sinew of that which is to be exerted in the

national defense, is properly thrown into the same class with

it. This power, also, has been examined already with much

attention, and has, I trust, been clearly shown to be necessary,

both in the extent and form given to it by the Constitution. I

will address one additional reflection only to those who contend

that the power ought to have been restrained to external

taxation by which they mean, taxes on articles imported from

other countries. It cannot be doubted that this will always be a

valuable source of revenue; that for a considerable time it must

be a principal source; that at this moment it is an essential

one. But we may form very mistaken ideas on this subject, if we

do not call to mind in our calculations, that the extent of

revenue drawn from foreign commerce must vary with the

variations, both in the extent and the kind of imports; and that

these variations do not correspond with the progress of

population, which must be the general measure of the public

wants. As long as agriculture continues the sole field of labor,

the importation of manufactures must increase as the consumers

multiply. As soon as domestic manufactures are begun by the hands

not called for by agriculture, the imported manufactures will

decrease as the numbers of people increase. In a more remote

stage, the imports may consist in a considerable part of raw

materials, which will be wrought into articles for exportation,

and will, therefore, require rather the encouragement of

bounties, than to be loaded with discouraging duties. A system of

government, meant for duration, ought to contemplate these

revolutions, and be able to accommodate itself to them. Some,

who have not denied the necessity of the power of taxation, have

grounded a very fierce attack against the Constitution, on the

language in which it is defined. It has been urged and echoed,

that the power "to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and

excises, to pay the debts, and provide for the common defense and

general welfare of the United States," amounts to an unlimited

commission to exercise every power which may be alleged to be

necessary for the common defense or general welfare. No stronger

proof could be given of the distress under which these writers

labor for objections, than their stooping to such a

misconstruction. Had no other enumeration or definition of the

powers of the Congress been found in the Constitution, than the

general expressions just cited, the authors of the objection

might have had some color for it; though it would have been

difficult to find a reason for so awkward a form of describing an

authority to legislate in all possible cases. A power to destroy

the freedom of the press, the trial by jury, or even to regulate

the course of descents, or the forms of conveyances, must be very

singularly expressed by the terms "to raise money for the

general welfare. "But what color can the objection have, when a

specification of the objects alluded to by these general terms

immediately follows, and is not even separated by a longer pause

than a semicolon? If the different parts of the same instrument

ought to be so expounded, as to give meaning to every part which

will bear it, shall one part of the same sentence be excluded

altogether from a share in the meaning; and shall the more

doubtful and indefinite terms be retained in their full extent,

and the clear and precise expressions be denied any signification

whatsoever? For what purpose could the enumeration of particular

powers be inserted, if these and all others were meant to be

included in the preceding general power? Nothing is more natural

nor common than first to use a general phrase, and then to

explain and qualify it by a recital of particulars. But the idea

of an enumeration of particulars which neither explain nor

qualify the general meaning, and can have no other effect than to

confound and mislead, is an absurdity, which, as we are reduced

to the dilemma of charging either on the authors of the objection

or on the authors of the Constitution, we must take the liberty

of supposing, had not its origin with the latter. The objection

here is the more extraordinary, as it appears that the language

used by the convention is a copy from the articles of

Confederation. The objects of the Union among the States, as

described in article third, are "their common defense, security

of their liberties, and mutual and general welfare. " The terms

of article eighth are still more identical: "All charges of war

and all other expenses that shall be incurred for the common

defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United States in

Congress, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury," etc. A

similar language again occurs in article ninth. Construe either

of these articles by the rules which would justify the

construction put on the new Constitution, and they vest in the

existing Congress a power to legislate in all cases whatsoever.

But what would have been thought of that assembly, if, attaching

themselves to these general expressions, and disregarding the

specifications which ascertain and limit their import, they had

exercised an unlimited power of providing for the common defense

and general welfare? I appeal to the objectors themselves,

whether they would in that case have employed the same reasoning

in justification of Congress as they now make use of against the

convention. How difficult it is for error to escape its own

condemnation!

To the People of the State of New York:

THE SECOND class of powers, lodged in the general government,

consists of those which regulate the intercourse with foreign

nations, to wit: to make treaties; to send and receive

ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; to define and

punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and

offenses against the law of nations; to regulate foreign

commerce, including a power to prohibit, after the year 1808, the

importation of slaves, and to lay an intermediate duty of ten

dollars per head, as a discouragement to such importations. This

class of powers forms an obvious and essential branch of the

federal administration. If we are to be one nation in any

respect, it clearly ought to be in respect to other nations. The

powers to make treaties and to send and receive ambassadors,

speak their own propriety. Both of them are comprised in the

articles of Confederation, with this difference only, that the

former is disembarrassed, by the plan of the convention, of an

exception, under which treaties might be substantially frustrated

by regulations of the States; and that a power of appointing and

receiving "other public ministers and consuls," is expressly

and very properly added to the former provision concerning

ambassadors. The term ambassador, if taken strictly, as seems to

be required by the second of the articles of Confederation,

comprehends the highest grade only of public ministers, and

excludes the grades which the United States will be most likely

to prefer, where foreign embassies may be necessary. And under no

latitude of construction will the term comprehend consuls. Yet it

has been found expedient, and has been the practice of Congress,

to employ the inferior grades of public ministers, and to send

and receive consuls. It is true, that where treaties of commerce

stipulate for the mutual appointment of consuls, whose functions

are connected with commerce, the admission of foreign consuls may

fall within the power of making commercial treaties; and that

where no such treaties exist, the mission of American consuls

into foreign countries may PERHAPS be covered under the

authority, given by the ninth article of the Confederation, to

appoint all such civil officers as may be necessary for managing

the general affairs of the United States. But the admission of

consuls into the United States, where no previous treaty has

stipulated it, seems to have been nowhere provided for. A supply

of the omission is one of the lesser instances in which the

convention have improved on the model before them. But the most

minute provisions become important when they tend to obviate the

necessity or the pretext for gradual and unobserved usurpations

of power. A list of the cases in which Congress have been

betrayed, or forced by the defects of the Confederation, into

violations of their chartered authorities, would not a little

surprise those who have paid no attention to the subject; and

would be no inconsiderable argument in favor of the new

Constitution, which seems to have provided no less studiously for

the lesser, than the more obvious and striking defects of the

old. The power to define and punish piracies and felonies

committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of

nations, belongs with equal propriety to the general government,

and is a still greater improvement on the articles of

Confederation. These articles contain no provision for the case

of offenses against the law of nations; and consequently leave

it in the power of any indiscreet member to embroil the

Confederacy with foreign nations. The provision of the federal

articles on the subject of piracies and felonies extends no

further than to the establishment of courts for the trial of

these offenses. The definition of piracies might, perhaps,

without inconveniency, be left to the law of nations; though a

legislative definition of them is found in most municipal codes.

A definition of felonies on the high seas is evidently

requisite. Felony is a term of loose signification, even in the

common law of England; and of various import in the statute law

of that kingdom. But neither the common nor the statute law of

that, or of any other nation, ought to be a standard for the

proceedings of this, unless previously made its own by

legislative adoption. The meaning of the term, as defined in the

codes of the several States, would be as impracticable as the

former would be a dishonorable and illegitimate guide. It is not

precisely the same in any two of the States; and varies in each

with every revision of its criminal laws. For the sake of

certainty and uniformity, therefore, the power of defining

felonies in this case was in every respect necessary and proper.

The regulation of foreign commerce, having fallen within several

views which have been taken of this subject, has been too fully

discussed to need additional proofs here of its being properly

submitted to the federal administration. It were doubtless to be

wished, that the power of prohibiting the importation of slaves

had not been postponed until the year 1808, or rather that it had

been suffered to have immediate operation. But it is not

difficult to account, either for this restriction on the general

government, or for the manner in which the whole clause is

expressed. It ought to be considered as a great point gained in

favor of humanity, that a period of twenty years may terminate

forever, within these States, a traffic which has so long and so

loudly upbraided the barbarism of modern policy; that within that

period, it will receive a considerable discouragement from the

federal government, and may be totally abolished, by a

concurrence of the few States which continue the unnatural

traffic, in the prohibitory example which has been given by so

great a majority of the Union. Happy would it be for the

unfortunate Africans, if an equal prospect lay before them of

being redeemed from the oppressions of their European brethren!

Attempts have been made to pervert this clause into an objection

against the Constitution, by representing it on one side as a

criminal toleration of an illicit practice, and on another as

calculated to prevent voluntary and beneficial emigrations from

Europe to America. I mention these misconstructions, not with a

view to give them an answer, for they deserve none, but as

specimens of the manner and spirit in which some have thought fit

to conduct their opposition to the proposed government. The

powers included in the THIRD class are those which provide for

the harmony and proper intercourse among the States. Under this

head might be included the particular restraints imposed on the

authority of the States, and certain powers of the judicial

department; but the former are reserved for a distinct class, and

the latter will be particularly examined when we arrive at the

structure and organization of the government. I shall confine

myself to a cursory review of the remaining powers comprehended

under this third description, to wit: to regulate commerce among

the several States and the Indian tribes; to coin money, regulate

the value thereof, and of foreign coin; to provide for the

punishment of counterfeiting the current coin and secureties of

the United States; to fix the standard of weights and measures;

to establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws

of bankruptcy, to prescribe the manner in which the public acts,

records, and judicial proceedings of each State shall be proved,

and the effect they shall have in other States; and to establish

post offices and post roads. The defect of power in the existing

Confederacy to regulate the commerce between its several members,

is in the number of those which have been clearly pointed out by

experience. To the proofs and remarks which former papers have

brought into view on this subject, it may be added that without

this supplemental provision, the great and essential power of

regulating foreign commerce would have been incomplete and

ineffectual. A very material object of this power was the relief

of the States which import and export through other States, from

the improper contributions levied on them by the latter. Were

these at liberty to regulate the trade between State and State,

it must be foreseen that ways would be found out to load the

articles of import and export, during the passage through their

jurisdiction, with duties which would fall on the makers of the

latter and the consumers of the former. We may be assured by past

experience, that such a practice would be introduced by future

contrivances; and both by that and a common knowledge of human

affairs, that it would nourish unceasing animosities, and not

improbably terminate in serious interruptions of the public

tranquillity. To those who do not view the question through the

medium of passion or of interest, the desire of the commercial

States to collect, in any form, an indirect revenue from their

uncommercial neighbors, must appear not less impolitic than it is

unfair; since it would stimulate the injured party, by resentment

as well as interest, to resort to less convenient channels for

their foreign trade. But the mild voice of reason, pleading the

cause of an enlarged and permanent interest, is but too often

drowned, before public bodies as well as individuals, by the

clamors of an impatient avidity for immediate and immoderate

gain. The necessity of a superintending authority over the

reciprocal trade of confederated States, has been illustrated by

other examples as well as our own. In Switzerland, where the

Union is so very slight, each canton is obliged to allow to

merchandises a passage through its jurisdiction into other

cantons, without an augmentation of the tolls. In Germany it is a

law of the empire, that the princes and states shall not lay

tolls or customs on bridges, rivers, or passages, without the

consent of the emperor and the diet; though it appears from a

quotation in an antecedent paper, that the practice in this, as

in many other instances in that confederacy, has not followed the

law, and has produced there the mischiefs which have been

foreseen here. Among the restraints imposed by the Union of the

Netherlands on its members, one is, that they shall not establish

imposts disadvantageous to their neighbors, without the general

permission. The regulation of commerce with the Indian tribes is

very properly unfettered from two limitations in the articles of

Confederation, which render the provision obscure and

contradictory. The power is there restrained to Indians, not

members of any of the States, and is not to violate or infringe

the legislative right of any State within its own limits. What

description of Indians are to be deemed members of a State, is

not yet settled, and has been a question of frequent perplexity

and contention in the federal councils. And how the trade with

Indians, though not members of a State, yet residing within its

legislative jurisdiction, can be regulated by an external

authority, without so far intruding on the internal rights of

legislation, is absolutely incomprehensible. This is not the only

case in which the articles of Confederation have inconsiderately

endeavored to accomplish impossibilities; to reconcile a partial

sovereignty in the Union, with complete sovereignty in the

States; to subvert a mathematical axiom, by taking away a part,

and letting the whole remain. All that need be remarked on the

power to coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign

coin, is, that by providing for this last case, the Constitution

has supplied a material omission in the articles of

Confederation. The authority of the existing Congress is

restrained to the regulation of coin STRUCK by their own

authority, or that of the respective States. It must be seen at

once that the proposed uniformity in the VALUE of the current

coin might be destroyed by subjecting that of foreign coin to the

different regulations of the different States. The punishment of

counterfeiting the public securities, as well as the current

coin, is submitted of course to that authority which is to secure

the value of both. The regulation of weights and measures is

transferred from the articles of Confederation, and is founded on

like considerations with the preceding power of regulating coin.

The dissimilarity in the rules of naturalization has long been

remarked as a fault in our system, and as laying a foundation for

intricate and delicate questions. In the fourth article of the

Confederation, it is declared "that the FREE INHABITANTS of each

of these States, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice,

excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of

FREE CITIZENS in the several States; and THE PEOPLE of each State

shall, in every other, enjoy all the privileges of trade and

commerce," etc. There is a confusion of language here, which is

remarkable. Why the terms FREE INHABITANTS are used in one part

of the article, FREE CITIZENS in another, and PEOPLE in another;

or what was meant by superadding to "all privileges and

immunities of free citizens," "all the privileges of trade and

commerce,"

cannot easily be determined. It seems to be a construction

scarcely avoidable, however, that those who come under the

denomination of FREE INHABITANTS of a State, although not

citizens of such State, are entitled, in every other State, to

all the privileges of FREE CITIZENS of the latter; that is, to

greater privileges than they may be entitled to in their own

State: so that it may be in the power of a particular State, or

rather every State is laid under a necessity, not only to confer

the rights of citizenship in other States upon any whom it may

admit to such rights within itself, but upon any whom it may

allow to become inhabitants within its jurisdiction. But were an

exposition of the term "inhabitants" to be admitted which

would confine the stipulated privileges to citizens alone, the

difficulty is diminished only, not removed. The very improper

power would still be retained by each State, of naturalizing

aliens in every other State. In one State, residence for a short

term confirms all the rights of citizenship: in another,

qualifications of greater importance are required. An alien,

therefore, legally incapacitated for certain rights in the

latter, may, by previous residence only in the former, elude his

incapacity; and thus the law of one State be preposterously

rendered paramount to the law of another, within the jurisdiction

of the other. We owe it to mere casualty, that very serious

embarrassments on this subject have been hitherto escaped. By the

laws of several States, certain descriptions of aliens, who had

rendered themselves obnoxious, were laid under interdicts

inconsistent not only with the rights of citizenship but with the

privilege of residence. What would have been the consequence, if

such persons, by residence or otherwise, had acquired the

character of citizens under the laws of another State, and then

asserted their rights as such, both to residence and citizenship,

within the State proscribing them? Whatever the legal

consequences might have been, other consequences would probably

have resulted, of too serious a nature not to be provided

against. The new Constitution has accordingly, with great

propriety, made provision against them, and all others proceeding

from the defect of the Confederation on this head, by authorizing

the general government to establish a uniform rule of

naturalization throughout the United States. The power of

establishing uniform laws of bankruptcy is so intimately

connected with the regulation of commerce, and will prevent so

many frauds where the parties or their property may lie or be

removed into different States, that the expediency of it seems

not likely to be drawn into question. The power of prescribing

by general laws, the manner in which the public acts, records and

judicial proceedings of each State shall be proved, and the

effect they shall have in other States, is an evident and

valuable improvement on the clause relating to this subject in

the articles of Confederation. The meaning of the latter is

extremely indeterminate, and can be of little importance under

any interpretation which it will bear. The power here established

may be rendered a very convenient instrument of justice, and be

particularly beneficial on the borders of contiguous States,

where the effects liable to justice may be suddenly and secretly

translated, in any stage of the process, within a foreign

jurisdiction. The power of establishing post roads must, in

every view, be a harmless power, and may, perhaps, by judicious

management, become productive of great public conveniency.

Nothing which tends to facilitate the intercourse between the

States can be deemed unworthy of the public care.

To the People of the State of New York:

THE FOURTH class comprises the following miscellaneous powers:1.

A power "to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by

securing, for a limited time, to authors and inventors, the

exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries.

"The utility of this power will scarcely be questioned. The

copyright of authors has been solemnly adjudged, in Great

Britain, to be a right of common law. The right to useful

inventions seems with equal reason to belong to the inventors.

The public good fully coincides in both cases with the claims of

individuals. The States cannot separately make effectual

provisions for either of the cases, and most of them have

anticipated the decision of this point, by laws passed at the

instance of Congress. 2. "To exercise exclusive legislation, in

all cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles

square) as may, by cession of particular States and the

acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of the

United States; and to exercise like authority over all places

purchased by the consent of the legislatures of the States in

which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines,

arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings. "The

indispensable necessity of complete authority at the seat of

government, carries its own evidence with it. It is a power

exercised by every legislature of the Union, I might say of the

world, by virtue of its general supremacy. Without it, not only

the public authority might be insulted and its proceedings

interrupted with impunity; but a dependence of the members of the

general government on the State comprehending the seat of the

government, for protection in the exercise of their duty, might

bring on the national councils an imputation of awe or influence,

equally dishonorable to the government and dissatisfactory to the

other members of the Confederacy. This consideration has the more

weight, as the gradual accumulation of public improvements at the

stationary residence of the government would be both too great a

public pledge to be left in the hands of a single State, and

would create so many obstacles to a removal of the government, as

still further to abridge its necessary independence. The extent

of this federal district is sufficiently circumscribed to satisfy

every jealousy of an opposite nature. And as it is to be

appropriated to this use with the consent of the State ceding it;

as the State will no doubt provide in the compact for the rights

and the consent of the citizens inhabiting it; as the inhabitants

will find sufficient inducements of interest to become willing

parties to the cession; as they will have had their voice in the

election of the government which is to exercise authority over

them; as a municipal legislature for local purposes, derived from

their own suffrages, will of course be allowed them; and as the

authority of the legislature of the State, and of the inhabitants

of the ceded part of it, to concur in the cession, will be

derived from the whole people of the State in their adoption of

the Constitution, every imaginable objection seems to be

obviated. The necessity of a like authority over forts,

magazines, etc., established by the general government, is not

less evident. The public money expended on such places, and the

public property deposited in them, requires that they should be

exempt from the authority of the particular State. Nor would it

be proper for the places on which the security of the entire

Union may depend, to be in any degree dependent on a particular

member of it. All objections and scruples are here also obviated,

by requiring the concurrence of the States concerned, in every

such establishment. 3. "To declare the punishment of treason,

but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or

forfeiture, except during the life of the person attained. "As

treason may be committed against the United States, the authority

of the United States ought to be enabled to punish it. But as

new-fangled and artificial treasons have been the great engines

by which violent factions, the natural offspring of free

government, have usually wreaked their alternate malignity on

each other, the convention have, with great judgment, opposed a

barrier to this peculiar danger, by inserting a constitutional

definition of the crime, fixing the proof necessary for

conviction of it, and restraining the Congress, even in punishing

it, from extending the consequences of guilt beyond the person of

its author. 4. "To admit new States into the Union; but no new

State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any

other State; nor any State be formed by the junction of two or

more States, or parts of States, without the consent of the

legislatures of the States concerned, as well as of the Congress.

"In the articles of Confederation, no provision is found on this

important subject. Canada was to be admitted of right, on her

joining in the measures of the United States; and the other

COLONIES, by which were evidently meant the other British

colonies, at the discretion of nine States. The eventual

establishment of NEW STATES seems to have been overlooked by the

compilers of that instrument. We have seen the inconvenience of

this omission, and the assumption of power into which Congress

have been led by it. With great propriety, therefore, has the new

system supplied the defect. The general precaution, that no new

States shall be formed, without the concurrence of the federal

authority, and that of the States concerned, is consonant to the

principles which ought to govern such transactions. The

particular precaution against the erection of new States, by the

partition of a State without its consent, quiets the jealousy of

the larger States; as that of the smaller is quieted by a like

precaution, against a junction of States without their consent.

5. "To dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations

respecting the territory or other property belonging to the

United States, with a proviso, that nothing in the Constitution

shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United

States, or of any particular State. "This is a power of very

great importance, and required by considerations similar to those

which show the propriety of the former. The proviso annexed is

proper in itself, and was probably rendered absolutely necessary

by jealousies and questions concerning the Western territory

sufficiently known to the public. 6. "To guarantee to every

State in the Union a republican form of government; to protect

each of them against invasion; and on application of the

legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be

convened), against domestic violence. "In a confederacy founded

on republican principles, and composed of republican members, the

superintending government ought clearly to possess authority to

defend the system against aristocratic or monarchial

innovations. The more intimate the nature of such a union may be,

the greater interest have the members in the political

institutions of each other; and the greater right to insist that

the forms of government under which the compact was entered into

should be SUBSTANTIALLY maintained. But a right implies a remedy;

and where else could the remedy be deposited, than where it is

deposited by the Constitution? Governments of dissimilar

principles and forms have been found less adapted to a federal

coalition of any sort, than those of a kindred nature. "As the

confederate republic of Germany," says Montesquieu, "consists

of free cities and petty states, subject to different princes,

experience shows us that it is more imperfect than that of

Holland and Switzerland. " "Greece was undone," he adds, "as

soon as the king of Macedon obtained a seat among the

Amphictyons. " In the latter case, no doubt, the

disproportionate force, as well as the monarchical form, of the

new confederate, had its share of influence on the events. It may

possibly be asked, what need there could be of such a

precaution, and whether it may not become a pretext for

alterations in the State governments, without the concurrence of

the States themselves. These questions admit of ready answers. If

the interposition of the general government should not be

needed, the provision for such an event will be a harmless

superfluity only in the Constitution. But who can say what

experiments may be produced by the caprice of particular States,

by the ambition of enterprising leaders, or by the intrigues and

influence of foreign powers? To the second question it may be

answered, that if the general government should interpose by

virtue of this constitutional authority, it will be, of course,

bound to pursue the authority. But the authority extends no

further than to a GUARANTY of a republican form of government,

which supposes a pre-existing government of the form which is to

be guaranteed. As long, therefore, as the existing republican

forms are continued by the States, they are guaranteed by the

federal Constitution. Whenever the States may choose to

substitute other republican forms, they have a right to do so,

and to claim the federal guaranty for the latter. The only

restriction imposed on them is, that they shall not exchange

republican for antirepublican Constitutions; a restriction

which, it is presumed, will hardly be considered as a grievance.

A protection against invasion is due from every society to the

parts composing it. The latitude of the expression here used

seems to secure each State, not only against foreign hostility,

but against ambitious or vindictive enterprises of its more

powerful neighbors. The history, both of ancient and modern

confederacies, proves that the weaker members of the union ought

not to be insensible to the policy of this article. Protection

against domestic violence is added with equal propriety. It has

been remarked, that even among the Swiss cantons, which, properly

speaking, are not under one government, provision is made for

this object; and the history of that league informs us that

mutual aid is frequently claimed and afforded; and as well by

the most democratic, as the other cantons. A recent and

well-known event among ourselves has warned us to be prepared for

emergencies of a like nature. At first view, it might seem not

to square with the republican theory, to suppose, either that a

majority have not the right, or that a minority will have the

force, to subvert a government; and consequently, that the

federal interposition can never be required, but when it would be

improper. But theoretic reasoning, in this as in most other

cases, must be qualified by the lessons of practice. Why may not

illicit combinations, for purposes of violence, be formed as

well by a majority of a State, especially a small State as by a

majority of a county, or a district of the same State; and if

the authority of the State ought, in the latter case, to protect

the local magistracy, ought not the federal authority, in the

former, to support the State authority? Besides, there are

certain parts of the State constitutions which are so interwoven

with the federal Constitution, that a violent blow cannot be

given to the one without communicating the wound to the other.

Insurrections in a State will rarely induce a federal

interposition, unless the number concerned in them bear some

proportion to the friends of government. It will be much better

that the violence in such cases should be repressed by the

superintending power, than that the majority should be left to

maintain their cause by a bloody and obstinate contest. The

existence of a right to interpose, will generally prevent the

necessity of exerting it. Is it true that force and right are

necessarily on the same side in republican governments? May not

the minor party possess such a superiority of pecuniary

resources, of military talents and experience, or of secret

succors from foreign powers, as will render it superior also in

an appeal to the sword? May not a more compact and advantageous

position turn the scale on the same side, against a superior

number so situated as to be less capable of a prompt and

collected exertion of its strength? Nothing can be more

chimerical than to imagine that in a trial of actual force,

victory may be calculated by the rules which prevail in a census

of the inhabitants, or which determine the event of an election!

May it not happen, in fine, that the minority of CITIZENS may

become a majority of PERSONS, by the accession of alien

residents, of a casual concourse of adventurers, or of those whom

the constitution of the State has not admitted to the rights of

suffrage? I take no notice of an unhappy species of population

abounding in some of the States, who, during the calm of regular

government, are sunk below the level of men; but who, in the

tempestuous scenes of civil violence, may emerge into the human

character, and give a superiority of strength to any party with

which they may associate themselves. In cases where it may be

doubtful on which side justice lies, what better umpires could

be desired by two violent factions, flying to arms, and tearing a

State to pieces, than the representatives of confederate States,

not heated by the local flame? To the impartiality of judges,

they would unite the affection of friends. Happy would it be if

such a remedy for its infirmities could be enjoyed by all free

governments; if a project equally effectual could be established

for the universal peace of mankind! Should it be asked, what is

to be the redress for an insurrection pervading all the States,

and comprising a superiority of the entire force, though not a

constitutional right? the answer must be, that such a case, as

it would be without the compass of human remedies, so it is

fortunately not within the compass of human probability; and

that it is a sufficient recommendation of the federal

Constitution, that it diminishes the risk of a calamity for which

no possible constitution can provide a cure. Among the

advantages of a confederate republic enumerated by Montesquieu,

an important one is, "that should a popular insurrection happen

in one of the States, the others are able to quell it. Should

abuses creep into one part, they are reformed by those that

remain sound. "7. "To consider all debts contracted, and

engagements entered into, before the adoption of this

Constitution, as being no less valid against the United States,

under this Constitution, than under the Confederation. "This

can only be considered as a declaratory proposition; and may have

been inserted, among other reasons, for the satisfaction of the

foreign creditors of the United States, who cannot be strangers

to the pretended doctrine, that a change in the political form of

civil society has the magical effect of dissolving its moral

obligations. Among the lesser criticisms which have been

exercised on the Constitution, it has been remarked that the

validity of engagements ought to have been asserted in favor of

the United States, as well as against them; and in the spirit

which usually characterizes little critics, the omission has been

transformed and magnified into a plot against the national

rights. The authors of this discovery may be told, what few

others need to be informed of, that as engagements are in their

nature reciprocal, an assertion of their validity on one side,

necessarily involves a validity on the other side; and that as

the article is merely declaratory, the establishment of the

principle in one case is sufficient for every case. They may be

further told, that every constitution must limit its precautions

to dangers that are not altogether imaginary; and that no real

danger can exist that the government would DARE, with, or even

without, this constitutional declaration before it, to remit the

debts justly due to the public, on the pretext here condemned. 8.

"To provide for amendments to be ratified by three fourths of

the States under two exceptions only. "That useful alterations

will be suggested by experience, could not but be foreseen. It

was requisite, therefore, that a mode for introducing them should

be provided. The mode preferred by the convention seems to be

stamped with every mark of propriety. It guards equally against

that extreme facility, which would render the Constitution too

mutable; and that extreme difficulty, which might perpetuate its

discovered faults. It, moreover, equally enables the general and

the State governments to originate the amendment of errors, as

they may be pointed out by the experience on one side, or on the

other. The exception in favor of the equality of suffrage in the

Senate, was probably meant as a palladium to the residuary

sovereignty of the States, implied and secured by that principle

of representation in one branch of the legislature; and was

probably insisted on by the States particularly attached to that

equality. The other exception must have been admitted on the same

considerations which produced the privilege defended by it. 9.

"The ratification of the conventions of nine States shall be

sufficient for the establishment of this Constitution between the

States, ratifying the same. "This article speaks for itself.

The express authority of the people alone could give due validity

to the Constitution. To have required the unanimous ratification

of the thirteen States, would have subjected the essential

interests of the whole to the caprice or corruption of a single

member. It would have marked a want of foresight in the

convention, which our own experience would have rendered

inexcusable. Two questions of a very delicate nature present

themselves on this occasion: 1. On what principle the

Confederation, which stands in the solemn form of a compact among

the States, can be superseded without the unanimous consent of

the parties to it? 2. What relation is to subsist between the

nine or more States ratifying the Constitution, and the remaining

few who do not become parties to it? The first question is

answered at once by recurring to the absolute necessity of the

case; to the great principle of self-preservation; to the

transcendent law of nature and of nature's God, which declares

that the safety and happiness of society are the objects at which

all political institutions aim, and to which all such

institutions must be sacrificed. PERHAPS, also, an answer may be

found without searching beyond the principles of the compact

itself. It has been heretofore noted among the defects of the

Confederation, that in many of the States it had received no

higher sanction than a mere legislative ratification. The

principle of reciprocality seems to require that its obligation

on the other States should be reduced to the same standard. A

compact between independent sovereigns, founded on ordinary acts

of legislative authority, can pretend to no higher validity than

a league or treaty between the parties. It is an established

doctrine on the subject of treaties, that all the articles are

mutually conditions of each other; that a breach of any one

article is a breach of the whole treaty; and that a breach,

committed by either of the parties, absolves the others, and

authorizes them, if they please, to pronounce the compact

violated and void. Should it unhappily be necessary to appeal to

these delicate truths for a justification for dispensing with

the consent of particular States to a dissolution of the federal

pact, will not the complaining parties find it a difficult task

to answer the MULTIPLIED and IMPORTANT infractions with which

they may be confronted? The time has been when it was incumbent

on us all to veil the ideas which this paragraph exhibits. The

scene is now changed, and with it the part which the same motives

dictate. The second question is not less delicate; and the

flattering prospect of its being merely hypothetical forbids an

overcurious discussion of it. It is one of those cases which must

be left to provide for itself. In general, it may be observed,

that although no political relation can subsist between the

assenting and dissenting States, yet the moral relations will

remain uncancelled. The claims of justice, both on one side and

on the other, will be in force, and must be fulfilled; the

rights of humanity must in all cases be duly and mutually

respected; whilst considerations of a common interest, and,

above all, the remembrance of the endearing scenes which are

past, and the anticipation of a speedy triumph over the obstacles

to reunion, will, it is hoped, not urge in vain MODERATION on one

side, and PRUDENCE on the other.

To the People of the State of New York:

A FIFTH class of provisions in favor of the federal authority

consists of the following restrictions on the authority of the

several States:1. "No State shall enter into any treaty,

alliance, or confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal;

coin money; emit bills of credit; make any thing but gold and

silver a legal tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of

attainder, ex-post-facto law, or law impairing the obligation of

contracts; or grant any title of nobility. "The prohibition

against treaties, alliances, and confederations makes a part of

the existing articles of Union; and for reasons which need no

explanation, is copied into the new Constitution. The prohibition

of letters of marque is another part of the old system, but is

somewhat extended in the new. According to the former, letters of

marque could be granted by the States after a declaration of war;

according to the latter, these licenses must be obtained, as well

during war as previous to its declaration, from the government of

the United States. This alteration is fully justified by the

advantage of uniformity in all points which relate to foreign

powers; and of immediate responsibility to the nation in all

those for whose conduct the nation itself is to be responsible.

The right of coining money, which is here taken from the States,

was left in their hands by the Confederation, as a concurrent

right with that of Congress, under an exception in favor of the

exclusive right of Congress to regulate the alloy and value. In

this instance, also, the new provision is an improvement on the

old. Whilst the alloy and value depended on the general

authority, a right of coinage in the particular States could have

no other effect than to multiply expensive mints and diversify

the forms and weights of the circulating pieces. The latter

inconveniency defeats one purpose for which the power was

originally submitted to the federal head; and as far as the

former might prevent an inconvenient remittance of gold and

silver to the central mint for recoinage, the end can be as well

attained by local mints established under the general authority.

The extension of the prohibition to bills of credit must give

pleasure to every citizen, in proportion to his love of justice

and his knowledge of the true springs of public prosperity. The

loss which America has sustained since the peace, from the

pestilent effects of paper money on the necessary confidence

between man and man, on the necessary confidence in the public

councils, on the industry and morals of the people, and on the

character of republican government, constitutes an enormous debt

against the States chargeable with this unadvised measure, which

must long remain unsatisfied; or rather an accumulation of guilt,

which can be expiated no otherwise than by a voluntary sacrifice

on the altar of justice, of the power which has been the

instrument of it. In addition to these persuasive

considerations, it may be observed, that the same reasons which

show the necessity of denying to the States the power of

regulating coin, prove with equal force that they ought not to be

at liberty to substitute a paper medium in the place of coin. Had

every State a right to regulate the value of its coin, there

might be as many different currencies as States, and thus the

intercourse among them would be impeded; retrospective

alterations in its value might be made, and thus the citizens of

other States be injured, and animosities be kindled among the

States themselves. The subjects of foreign powers might suffer

from the same cause, and hence the Union be discredited and

embroiled by the indiscretion of a single member. No one of these

mischiefs is less incident to a power in the States to emit paper

money, than to coin gold or silver. The power to make any thing

but gold and silver a tender in payment of debts, is withdrawn

from the States, on the same principle with that of issuing a

paper currency. Bills of attainder, ex-post-facto laws, and laws

impairing the obligation of contracts, are contrary to the first

principles of the social compact, and to every principle of sound

legislation. The two former are expressly prohibited by the

declarations prefixed to some of the State constitutions, and all

of them are prohibited by the spirit and scope of these

fundamental charters. Our own experience has taught us,

nevertheless, that additional fences against these dangers ought

not to be omitted. Very properly, therefore, have the convention

added this constitutional bulwark in favor of personal security

and private rights; and I am much deceived if they have not, in

so doing, as faithfully consulted the genuine sentiments as the

undoubted interests of their constituents. The sober people of

America are weary of the fluctuating policy which has directed

the public councils. They have seen with regret and indignation

that sudden changes and legislative interferences, in cases

affecting personal rights, become jobs in the hands of

enterprising and influential speculators, and snares to the

more-industrious and less-informed part of the community. They

have seen, too, that one legislative interference is but the

first link of a long chain of repetitions, every subsequent

interference being naturally produced by the effects of the

preceding. They very rightly infer, therefore, that some thorough

reform is wanting, which will banish speculations on public

measures, inspire a general prudence and industry, and give a

regular course to the business of society. The prohibition with

respect to titles of nobility is copied from the articles of

Confederation and needs no comment. 2. "No State shall, without

the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties on imports

or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing

its inspection laws, and the net produce of all duties and

imposts laid by any State on imports or exports, shall be for the

use of the treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall

be subject to the revision and control of the Congress. No State

shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty on tonnage,

keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any

agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power,

or engage in war unless actually invaded, or in such imminent

danger as will not admit of delay. "The restraint on the power

of the States over imports and exports is enforced by all the

arguments which prove the necessity of submitting the regulation

of trade to the federal councils. It is needless, therefore, to

remark further on this head, than that the manner in which the

restraint is qualified seems well calculated at once to secure to

the States a reasonable discretion in providing for the

conveniency of their imports and exports, and to the United

States a reasonable check against the abuse of this discretion.

The remaining particulars of this clause fall within reasonings

which are either so obvious, or have been so fully developed,

that they may be passed over without remark. The SIXTH and last

class consists of the several powers and provisions by which

efficacy is given to all the rest. 1. Of these the first is, the

"power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for

carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other

powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the

United States, or in any department or officer thereof. "Few

parts of the Constitution have been assailed with more

intemperance than this; yet on a fair investigation of it, no

part can appear more completely invulnerable. Without the

SUBSTANCE of this power, the whole Constitution would be a dead

letter. Those who object to the article, therefore, as a part of

the Constitution, can only mean that the FORM of the provision is

improper. But have they considered whether a better form could

have been substituted? There are four other possible methods

which the Constitution might have taken on this subject. They

might have copied the second article of the existing

Confederation, which would have prohibited the exercise of any

power not EXPRESSLY delegated; they might have attempted a

positive enumeration of the powers comprehended under the general

terms "necessary and proper"; they might have attempted a

negative enumeration of them, by specifying the powers excepted

from the general definition; they might have been altogether

silent on the subject, leaving these necessary and proper powers

to construction and inference. Had the convention taken the

first method of adopting the second article of Confederation, it

is evident that the new Congress would be continually exposed, as

their predecessors have been, to the alternative of construing

the term "EXPRESSLY" with so much rigor, as to disarm the

government of all real authority whatever, or with so much

latitude as to destroy altogether the force of the restriction.

It would be easy to show, if it were necessary, that no important

power, delegated by the articles of Confederation, has been or

can be executed by Congress, without recurring more or less to

the doctrine of CONSTRUCTION or IMPLICATION. As the powers

delegated under the new system are more extensive, the government

which is to administer it would find itself still more distressed

with the alternative of betraying the public interests by doing

nothing, or of violating the Constitution by exercising powers

indispensably necessary and proper, but, at the same time, not

EXPRESSLY granted. Had the convention attempted a positive

enumeration of the powers necessary and proper for carrying their

other powers into effect, the attempt would have involved a

complete digest of laws on every subject to which the

Constitution relates; accommodated too, not only to the existing

state of things, but to all the possible changes which futurity

may produce; for in every new application of a general power, the

PARTICULAR POWERS, which are the means of attaining the OBJECT of

the general power, must always necessarily vary with that object,

and be often properly varied whilst the object remains the same.

Had they attempted to enumerate the particular powers or means

not necessary or proper for carrying the general powers into

execution, the task would have been no less chimerical; and would

have been liable to this further objection, that every defect in

the enumeration would have been equivalent to a positive grant of

authority. If, to avoid this consequence, they had attempted a

partial enumeration of the exceptions, and described the residue

by the general terms, NOT NECESSARY OR PROPER, it must have

happened that the enumeration would comprehend a few of the

excepted powers only; that these would be such as would be least

likely to be assumed or tolerated, because the enumeration would

of course select such as would be least necessary or proper; and

that the unnecessary and improper powers included in the

residuum, would be less forcibly excepted, than if no partial

enumeration had been made. Had the Constitution been silent on

this head, there can be no doubt that all the particular powers

requisite as means of executing the general powers would have

resulted to the government, by unavoidable implication. No axiom

is more clearly established in law, or in reason, than that

wherever the end is required, the means are authorized; wherever

a general power to do a thing is given, every particular power

necessary for doing it is included. Had this last method,

therefore, been pursued by the convention, every objection now

urged against their plan would remain in all its plausibility;

and the real inconveniency would be incurred of not removing a

pretext which may be seized on critical occasions for drawing

into question the essential powers of the Union. If it be asked

what is to be the consequence, in case the Congress shall

misconstrue this part of the Constitution, and exercise powers

not warranted by its true meaning, I answer, the same as if they

should misconstrue or enlarge any other power vested in them; as

if the general power had been reduced to particulars, and any one

of these were to be violated; the same, in short, as if the State

legislatures should violate the irrespective constitutional

authorities. In the first instance, the success of the usurpation

will depend on the executive and judiciary departments, which are

to expound and give effect to the legislative acts; and in the

last resort a remedy must be obtained from the people who can, by

the election of more faithful representatives, annul the acts of

the usurpers. The truth is, that this ultimate redress may be

more confided in against unconstitutional acts of the federal

than of the State legislatures, for this plain reason, that as

every such act of the former will be an invasion of the rights of

the latter, these will be ever ready to mark the innovation, to

sound the alarm to the people, and to exert their local influence

in effecting a change of federal representatives. There being no

such intermediate body between the State legislatures and the

people interested in watching the conduct of the former,

violations of the State constitutions are more likely to remain

unnoticed and unredressed. 2. "This Constitution and the laws

of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof,

and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the

authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the

land, and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any

thing in the constitution or laws of any State to the contrary

notwithstanding. "The indiscreet zeal of the adversaries to the

Constitution has betrayed them into an attack on this part of it

also, without which it would have been evidently and radically

defective. To be fully sensible of this, we need only suppose for

a moment that the supremacy of the State constitutions had been

left complete by a saving clause in their favor. In the first

place, as these constitutions invest the State legislatures with

absolute sovereignty, in all cases not excepted by the existing

articles of Confederation, all the authorities contained in the

proposed Constitution, so far as they exceed those enumerated in

the Confederation, would have been annulled, and the new Congress

would have been reduced to the same impotent condition with their

predecessors. In the next place, as the constitutions of some of

the States do not even expressly and fully recognize the existing

powers of the Confederacy, an express saving of the supremacy of

the former would, in such States, have brought into question

every power contained in the proposed Constitution. In the third

place, as the constitutions of the States differ much from each

other, it might happen that a treaty or national law, of great

and equal importance to the States, would interfere with some and

not with other constitutions, and would consequently be valid in

some of the States, at the same time that it would have no effect

in others. In fine, the world would have seen, for the first

time, a system of government founded on an inversion of the

fundamental principles of all government; it would have seen the

authority of the whole society every where subordinate to the

authority of the parts; it would have seen a monster, in which

the head was under the direction of the members. 3. "The

Senators and Representatives, and the members of the several

State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both

of the United States and the several States, shall be bound by

oath or affirmation to support this Constitution. "It has been

asked why it was thought necessary, that the State magistracy

should be bound to support the federal Constitution, and

unnecessary that a like oath should be imposed on the officers of

the United States, in favor of the State constitutions. Several

reasons might be assigned for the distinction. I content myself

with one, which is obvious and conclusive. The members of the

federal government will have no agency in carrying the State

constitutions into effect. The members and officers of the State

governments, on the contrary, will have an essential agency in

giving effect to the federal Constitution. The election of the

President and Senate will depend, in all cases, on the

legislatures of the several States. And the election of the House

of Representatives will equally depend on the same authority in

the first instance; and will, probably, forever be conducted by

the officers, and according to the laws, of the States. 4. Among

the provisions for giving efficacy to the federal powers might be

added those which belong to the executive and judiciary

departments: but as these are reserved for particular examination

in another place, I pass them over in this. We have now

reviewed, in detail, all the articles composing the sum or

quantity of power delegated by the proposed Constitution to the

federal government, and are brought to this undeniable

conclusion, that no part of the power is unnecessary or improper

for accomplishing the necessary objects of the Union. The

question, therefore, whether this amount of power shall be

granted or not, resolves itself into another question, whether or

not a government commensurate to the exigencies of the Union

shall be established; or, in other words, whether the Union

itself shall be preserved.

To the People of the State of New York:

HAVING shown that no one of the powers transferred to the federal

government is unnecessary or improper, the next question to be

considered is, whether the whole mass of them will be dangerous

to the portion of authority left in the several States. The

adversaries to the plan of the convention, instead of considering

in the first place what degree of power was absolutely necessary

for the purposes of the federal government, have exhausted

themselves in a secondary inquiry into the possible consequences

of the proposed degree of power to the governments of the

particular States. But if the Union, as has been shown, be

essential to the security of the people of America against

foreign danger; if it be essential to their security against

contentions and wars among the different States; if it be

essential to guard them against those violent and oppressive

factions which embitter the blessings of liberty, and against

those military establishments which must gradually poison its

very fountain; if, in a word, the Union be essential to the

happiness of the people of America, is it not preposterous, to

urge as an objection to a government, without which the objects

of the Union cannot be attained, that such a government may

derogate from the importance of the governments of the individual

States? Was, then, the American Revolution effected, was the

American Confederacy formed, was the precious blood of thousands

spilt, and the hard-earned substance of millions lavished, not

that the people of America should enjoy peace, liberty, and

safety, but that the government of the individual States, that

particular municipal establishments, might enjoy a certain extent

of power, and be arrayed with certain dignities and attributes of

sovereignty? We have heard of the impious doctrine in the Old

World, that the people were made for kings, not kings for the

people. Is the same doctrine to be revived in the New, in another

shape that the solid happiness of the people is to be sacrificed

to the views of political institutions of a different form? It is

too early for politicians to presume on our forgetting that the

public good, the real welfare of the great body of the people, is

the supreme object to be pursued; and that no form of government

whatever has any other value than as it may be fitted for the

attainment of this object. Were the plan of the convention

adverse to the public happiness, my voice would be, Reject the

plan. Were the Union itself inconsistent with the public

happiness, it would be, Abolish the Union. In like manner, as far

as the sovereignty of the States cannot be reconciled to the

happiness of the people, the voice of every good citizen must be,

Let the former be sacrificed to the latter. How far the sacrifice

is necessary, has been shown. How far the unsacrificed residue

will be endangered, is the question before us. Several important

considerations have been touched in the course of these papers,

which discountenance the supposition that the operation of the

federal government will by degrees prove fatal to the State

governments. The more I revolve the subject, the more fully I am

persuaded that the balance is much more likely to be disturbed by

the preponderancy of the last than of the first scale. We have

seen, in all the examples of ancient and modern confederacies,

the strongest tendency continually betraying itself in the

members, to despoil the general government of its authorities,

with a very ineffectual capacity in the latter to defend itself

against the encroachments. Although, in most of these examples,

the system has been so dissimilar from that under consideration

as greatly to weaken any inference concerning the latter from the

fate of the former, yet, as the States will retain, under the

proposed Constitution, a very extensive portion of active

sovereignty, the inference ought not to be wholly disregarded. In

the Achaean league it is probable that the federal head had a

degree and species of power, which gave it a considerable

likeness to the government framed by the convention. The Lycian

Confederacy, as far as its principles and form are transmitted,

must have borne a still greater analogy to it. Yet history does

not inform us that either of them ever degenerated, or tended to

degenerate, into one consolidated government. On the contrary, we

know that the ruin of one of them proceeded from the incapacity

of the federal authority to prevent the dissensions, and finally

the disunion, of the subordinate authorities. These cases are the

more worthy of our attention, as the external causes by which the

component parts were pressed together were much more numerous and

powerful than in our case; and consequently less powerful

ligaments within would be sufficient to bind the members to the

head, and to each other. In the feudal system, we have seen a

similar propensity exemplified. Notwithstanding the want of

proper sympathy in every instance between the local sovereigns

and the people, and the sympathy in some instances between the

general sovereign and the latter, it usually happened that the

local sovereigns prevailed in the rivalship for encroachments.

Had no external dangers enforced internal harmony and

subordination, and particularly, had the local sovereigns

possessed the affections of the people, the great kingdoms in

Europe would at this time consist of as many independent princes

as there were formerly feudatory barons. The State government

will have the advantage of the Federal government, whether we

compare them in respect to the immediate dependence of the one on

the other; to the weight of personal influence which each side

will possess; to the powers respectively vested in them; to the

predilection and probable support of the people; to the

disposition and faculty of resisting and frustrating the measures

of each other. The State governments may be regarded as

constituent and essential parts of the federal government; whilst

the latter is nowise essential to the operation or organization

of the former. Without the intervention of the State

legislatures, the President of the United States cannot be

elected at all. They must in all cases have a great share in his

appointment, and will, perhaps, in most cases, of themselves

determine it. The Senate will be elected absolutely and

exclusively by the State legislatures. Even the House of

Representatives, though drawn immediately from the people, will

be chosen very much under the influence of that class of men,

whose influence over the people obtains for themselves an

election into the State legislatures. Thus, each of the principal

branches of the federal government will owe its existence more or

less to the favor of the State governments, and must consequently

feel a dependence, which is much more likely to beget a

disposition too obsequious than too overbearing towards them. On

the other side, the component parts of the State governments will

in no instance be indebted for their appointment to the direct

agency of the federal government, and very little, if at all, to

the local influence of its members. The number of individuals

employed under the Constitution of the United States will be much

smaller than the number employed under the particular States.

There will consequently be less of personal influence on the side

of the former than of the latter. The members of the legislative,

executive, and judiciary departments of thirteen and more States,

the justices of peace, officers of militia, ministerial officers

of justice, with all the county, corporation, and town officers,

for three millions and more of people, intermixed, and having

particular acquaintance with every class and circle of people,

must exceed, beyond all proportion, both in number and influence,

those of every description who will be employed in the

administration of the federal system. Compare the members of the

three great departments of the thirteen States, excluding from

the judiciary department the justices of peace, with the members

of the corresponding departments of the single government of the

Union; compare the militia officers of three millions of people

with the military and marine officers of any establishment which

is within the compass of probability, or, I may add, of

possibility, and in this view alone, we may pronounce the

advantage of the States to be decisive. If the federal government

is to have collectors of revenue, the State governments will have

theirs also. And as those of the former will be principally on

the seacoast, and not very numerous, whilst those of the latter

will be spread over the face of the country, and will be very

numerous, the advantage in this view also lies on the same side.

It is true, that the Confederacy is to possess, and may exercise,

the power of collecting internal as well as external taxes

throughout the States; but it is probable that this power will

not be resorted to, except for supplemental purposes of revenue;

that an option will then be given to the States to supply their

quotas by previous collections of their own; and that the

eventual collection, under the immediate authority of the Union,

will generally be made by the officers, and according to the

rules, appointed by the several States. Indeed it is extremely

probable, that in other instances, particularly in the

organization of the judicial power, the officers of the States

will be clothed with the correspondent authority of the Union.

Should it happen, however, that separate collectors of internal

revenue should be appointed under the federal government, the

influence of the whole number would not bear a comparison with

that of the multitude of State officers in the opposite scale.

Within every district to which a federal collector would be

allotted, there would not be less than thirty or forty, or even

more, officers of different descriptions, and many of them

persons of character and weight, whose influence would lie on the

side of the State. The powers delegated by the proposed

Constitution to the federal government are few and defined. Those

which are to remain in the State governments are numerous and

indefinite. The former will be exercised principally on external

objects, as war, peace, negotiation, and foreign commerce; with

which last the power of taxation will, for the most part, be

connected. The powers reserved to the several States will extend

to all the objects which, in the ordinary course of affairs,

concern the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, and

the internal order, improvement, and prosperity of the State. The

operations of the federal government will be most extensive and

important in times of war and danger; those of the State

governments, in times of peace and security. As the former

periods will probably bear a small proportion to the latter, the

State governments will here enjoy another advantage over the

federal government. The more adequate, indeed, the federal powers

may be rendered to the national defense, the less frequent will

be those scenes of danger which might favor their ascendancy over

the governments of the particular States. If the new Constitution

be examined with accuracy and candor, it will be found that the

change which it proposes consists much less in the addition of

NEW POWERS to the Union, than in the invigoration of its ORIGINAL

POWERS. The regulation of commerce, it is true, is a new power;

but that seems to be an addition which few oppose, and from which

no apprehensions are entertained. The powers relating to war and

peace, armies and fleets, treaties and finance, with the other

more considerable powers, are all vested in the existing Congress

by the articles of Confederation. The proposed change does not

enlarge these powers; it only substitutes a more effectual mode

of administering them. The change relating to taxation may be

regarded as the most important; and yet the present Congress have

as complete authority to REQUIRE of the States indefinite

supplies of money for the common defense and general welfare, as

the future Congress will have to require them of individual

citizens; and the latter will be no more bound than the States

themselves have been, to pay the quotas respectively taxed on

them. Had the States complied punctually with the articles of

Confederation, or could their compliance have been enforced by as

peaceable means as may be used with success towards single

persons, our past experience is very far from countenancing an

opinion, that the State governments would have lost their

constitutional powers, and have gradually undergone an entire

consolidation. To maintain that such an event would have ensued,

would be to say at once, that the existence of the State

governments is incompatible with any system whatever that

accomplishes the essential purposes of the Union.

To the People of the State of New York:

RESUMING the subject of the last paper, I proceed to inquire

whether the federal government or the State governments will have

the advantage with regard to the predilection and support of the

people. Notwithstanding the different modes in which they are

appointed, we must consider both of them as substantially

dependent on the great body of the citizens of the United States.

I assume this position here as it respects the first, reserving

the proofs for another place. The federal and State governments

are in fact but different agents and trustees of the people,

constituted with different powers, and designed for different

purposes. The adversaries of the Constitution seem to have lost

sight of the people altogether in their reasonings on this

subject; and to have viewed these different establishments, not

only as mutual rivals and enemies, but as uncontrolled by any

common superior in their efforts to usurp the authorities of each

other. These gentlemen must here be reminded of their error. They

must be told that the ultimate authority, wherever the derivative

may be found, resides in the people alone, and that it will not

depend merely on the comparative ambition or address of the

different governments, whether either, or which of them, will be

able to enlarge its sphere of jurisdiction at the expense of the

other. Truth, no less than decency, requires that the event in

every case should be supposed to depend on the sentiments and

sanction of their common constituents. Many considerations,

besides those suggested on a former occasion, seem to place it

beyond doubt that the first and most natural attachment of the

people will be to the governments of their respective States.

Into the administration of these a greater number of individuals

will expect to rise. From the gift of these a greater number of

offices and emoluments will flow. By the superintending care of

these, all the more domestic and personal interests of the people

will be regulated and provided for. With the affairs of these,

the people will be more familiarly and minutely conversant. And

with the members of these, will a greater proportion of the

people have the ties of personal acquaintance and friendship, and

of family and party attachments; on the side of these,

therefore, the popular bias may well be expected most strongly to

incline. Experience speaks the same language in this case. The

federal administration, though hitherto very defective in

comparison with what may be hoped under a better system, had,

during the war, and particularly whilst the independent fund of

paper emissions was in credit, an activity and importance as

great as it can well have in any future circumstances whatever.

It was engaged, too, in a course of measures which had for their

object the protection of everything that was dear, and the

acquisition of everything that could be desirable to the people

at large. It was, nevertheless, invariably found, after the

transient enthusiasm for the early Congresses was over, that the

attention and attachment of the people were turned anew to their

own particular governments; that the federal council was at no

time the idol of popular favor; and that opposition to proposed

enlargements of its powers and importance was the side usually

taken by the men who wished to build their political consequence

on the prepossessions of their fellow-citizens. If, therefore,

as has been elsewhere remarked, the people should in future

become more partial to the federal than to the State governments,

the change can only result from such manifest and irresistible

proofs of a better administration, as will overcome all their

antecedent propensities. And in that case, the people ought not

surely to be precluded from giving most of their confidence where

they may discover it to be most due; but even in that case the

State governments could have little to apprehend, because it is

only within a certain sphere that the federal power can, in the

nature of things, be advantageously administered. The remaining

points on which I propose to compare the federal and State

governments, are the disposition and the faculty they may

respectively possess, to resist and frustrate the measures of

each other. It has been already proved that the members of the

federal will be more dependent on the members of the State

governments, than the latter will be on the former. It has

appeared also, that the prepossessions of the people, on whom

both will depend, will be more on the side of the State

governments, than of the federal government. So far as the

disposition of each towards the other may be influenced by these

causes, the State governments must clearly have the advantage.

But in a distinct and very important point of view, the advantage

will lie on the same side. The prepossessions, which the members

themselves will carry into the federal government, will generally

be favorable to the States; whilst it will rarely happen, that

the members of the State governments will carry into the public

councils a bias in favor of the general government. A local

spirit will infallibly prevail much more in the members of

Congress, than a national spirit will prevail in the legislatures

of the particular States. Every one knows that a great proportion

of the errors committed by the State legislatures proceeds from

the disposition of the members to sacrifice the comprehensive and

permanent interest of the State, to the particular and separate

views of the counties or districts in which they reside. And if

they do not sufficiently enlarge their policy to embrace the

collective welfare of their particular State, how can it be

imagined that they will make the aggregate prosperity of the

Union, and the dignity and respectability of its government, the

objects of their affections and consultations? For the same

reason that the members of the State legislatures will be

unlikely to attach themselves sufficiently to national objects,

the members of the federal legislature will be likely to attach

themselves too much to local objects. The States will be to the

latter what counties and towns are to the former. Measures will

too often be decided according to their probable effect, not on

the national prosperity and happiness, but on the prejudices,

interests, and pursuits of the governments and people of the

individual States. What is the spirit that has in general

characterized the proceedings of Congress? A perusal of their

journals, as well as the candid acknowledgments of such as have

had a seat in that assembly, will inform us, that the members

have but too frequently displayed the character, rather of

partisans of their respective States, than of impartial guardians

of a common interest; that where on one occasion improper

sacrifices have been made of local considerations, to the

aggrandizement of the federal government, the great interests of

the nation have suffered on a hundred, from an undue attention to

the local prejudices, interests, and views of the particular

States. I mean not by these reflections to insinuate, that the

new federal government will not embrace a more enlarged plan of

policy than the existing government may have pursued; much less,

that its views will be as confined as those of the State

legislatures; but only that it will partake sufficiently of the

spirit of both, to be disinclined to invade the rights of the

individual States, or the preorgatives of their governments. The

motives on the part of the State governments, to augment their

prerogatives by defalcations from the federal government, will be

overruled by no reciprocal predispositions in the members. Were

it admitted, however, that the Federal government may feel an

equal disposition with the State governments to extend its power

beyond the due limits, the latter would still have the advantage

in the means of defeating such encroachments. If an act of a

particular State, though unfriendly to the national government,

be generally popular in that State and should not too grossly

violate the oaths of the State officers, it is executed

immediately and, of course, by means on the spot and depending on

the State alone. The opposition of the federal government, or the

interposition of federal officers, would but inflame the zeal of

all parties on the side of the State, and the evil could not be

prevented or repaired, if at all, without the employment of means

which must always be resorted to with reluctance and difficulty.

On the other hand, should an unwarrantable measure of the federal

government be unpopular in particular States, which would seldom

fail to be the case, or even a warrantable measure be so, which

may sometimes be the case, the means of opposition to it are

powerful and at hand. The disquietude of the people; their

repugnance and, perhaps, refusal to co-operate with the officers

of the Union; the frowns of the executive magistracy of the

State; the embarrassments created by legislative devices, which

would often be added on such occasions, would oppose, in any

State, difficulties not to be despised; would form, in a large

State, very serious impediments; and where the sentiments of

several adjoining States happened to be in unison, would present

obstructions which the federal government would hardly be willing

to encounter. But ambitious encroachments of the federal

government, on the authority of the State governments, would not

excite the opposition of a single State, or of a few States

only. They would be signals of general alarm. Every government

would espouse the common cause. A correspondence would be

opened. Plans of resistance would be concerted. One spirit would

animate and conduct the whole. The same combinations, in short,

would result from an apprehension of the federal, as was produced

by the dread of a foreign, yoke; and unless the projected

innovations should be voluntarily renounced, the same appeal to

a trial of force would be made in the one case as was made in the

other. But what degree of madness could ever drive the federal

government to such an extremity. In the contest with Great

Britain, one part of the empire was employed against the other.

The more numerous part invaded the rights of the less numerous

part. The attempt was unjust and unwise; but it was not in

speculation absolutely chimerical. But what would be the contest

in the case we are supposing? Who would be the parties? A few

representatives of the people would be opposed to the people

themselves; or rather one set of representatives would be

contending against thirteen sets of representatives, with the

whole body of their common constituents on the side of the

latter. The only refuge left for those who prophesy the downfall

of the State governments is the visionary supposition that the

federal government may previously accumulate a military force for

the projects of ambition. The reasonings contained in these

papers must have been employed to little purpose indeed, if it

could be necessary now to disprove the reality of this danger.

That the people and the States should, for a sufficient period of

time, elect an uninterrupted succession of men ready to betray

both; that the traitors should, throughout this period,

uniformly and systematically pursue some fixed plan for the

extension of the military establishment; that the governments

and the people of the States should silently and patiently behold

the gathering storm, and continue to supply the materials, until

it should be prepared to burst on their own heads, must appear to

every one more like the incoherent dreams of a delirious

jealousy, or the misjudged exaggerations of a counterfeit zeal,

than like the sober apprehensions of genuine patriotism.

Extravagant as the supposition is, let it however be made. Let a

regular army, fully equal to the resources of the country, be

formed; and let it be entirely at the devotion of the federal

government; still it would not be going too far to say, that the

State governments, with the people on their side, would be able

to repel the danger. The highest number to which, according to

the best computation, a standing army can be carried in any

country, does not exceed one hundredth part of the whole number

of souls; or one twenty-fifth part of the number able to bear

arms. This proportion would not yield, in the United States, an

army of more than twenty-five or thirty thousand men. To these

would be opposed a militia amounting to near half a million of

citizens with arms in their hands, officered by men chosen from

among themselves, fighting for their common liberties, and united

and conducted by governments possessing their affections and

confidence. It may well be doubted, whether a militia thus

circumstanced could ever be conquered by such a proportion of

regular troops. Those who are best acquainted with the last

successful resistance of this country against the British arms,

will be most inclined to deny the possibility of it. Besides the

advantage of being armed, which the Americans possess over the

people of almost every other nation, the existence of

subordinate governments, to which the people are attached, and by

which the militia officers are appointed, forms a barrier against

the enterprises of ambition, more insurmountable than any which a

simple government of any form can admit of. Notwithstanding the

military establishments in the several kingdoms of Europe, which

are carried as far as the public resources will bear, the

governments are afraid to trust the people with arms. And it is

not certain, that with this aid alone they would not be able to

shake off their yokes. But were the people to possess the

additional advantages of local governments chosen by themselves,

who could collect the national will and direct the national

force, and of officers appointed out of the militia, by these

governments, and attached both to them and to the militia, it may

be affirmed with the greatest assurance, that the throne of every

tyranny in Europe would be speedily overturned in spite of the

legions which surround it. Let us not insult the free and gallant

citizens of America with the suspicion, that they would be less

able to defend the rights of which they would be in actual

possession, than the debased subjects of arbitrary power would be

to rescue theirs from the hands of their oppressors. Let us

rather no longer insult them with the supposition that they can

ever reduce themselves to the necessity of making the experiment,

by a blind and tame submission to the long train of insidious

measures which must precede and produce it. The argument under

the present head may be put into a very concise form, which

appears altogether conclusive. Either the mode in which the

federal government is to be constructed will render it

sufficiently dependent on the people, or it will not. On the

first supposition, it will be restrained by that dependence from

forming schemes obnoxious to their constituents. On the other

supposition, it will not possess the confidence of the people,

and its schemes of usurpation will be easily defeated by the

State governments, who will be supported by the people. On

summing up the considerations stated in this and the last paper,

they seem to amount to the most convincing evidence, that the

powers proposed to be lodged in the federal government are as

little formidable to those reserved to the individual States, as

they are indispensably necessary to accomplish the purposes of

the Union; and that all those alarms which have been sounded, of

a meditated and consequential annihilation of the State

governments, must, on the most favorable interpretation, be

ascribed to the chimerical fears of the authors of them.

To the People of the State of New York:

HAVING reviewed the general form of the proposed government and

the general mass of power allotted to it, I proceed to examine

the particular structure of this government, and the distribution

of this mass of power among its constituent parts. One of the

principal objections inculcated by the more respectable

adversaries to the Constitution, is its supposed violation of the

political maxim, that the legislative, executive, and judiciary

departments ought to be separate and distinct. In the structure

of the federal government, no regard, it is said, seems to have

been paid to this essential precaution in favor of liberty. The

several departments of power are distributed and blended in such

a manner as at once to destroy all symmetry and beauty of form,

and to expose some of the essential parts of the edifice to the

danger of being crushed by the disproportionate weight of other

parts. No political truth is certainly of greater intrinsic

value, or is stamped with the authority of more enlightened

patrons of liberty, than that on which the objection is founded.

The accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive, and

judiciary, in the same hands, whether of one, a few, or many, and

whether hereditary, selfappointed, or elective, may justly be

pronounced the very definition of tyranny. Were the federal

Constitution, therefore, really chargeable with the accumulation

of power, or with a mixture of powers, having a dangerous

tendency to such an accumulation, no further arguments would be

necessary to inspire a universal reprobation of the system. I

persuade myself, however, that it will be made apparent to every

one, that the charge cannot be supported, and that the maxim on

which it relies has been totally misconceived and misapplied. In

order to form correct ideas on this important subject, it will be

proper to investigate the sense in which the preservation of

liberty requires that the three great departments of power should

be separate and distinct. The oracle who is always consulted and

cited on this subject is the celebrated Montesquieu. If he be not

the author of this invaluable precept in the science of politics,

he has the merit at least of displaying and recommending it most

effectually to the attention of mankind. Let us endeavor, in the

first place, to ascertain his meaning on this point. The British

Constitution was to Montesquieu what Homer has been to the

didactic writers on epic poetry. As the latter have considered

the work of the immortal bard as the perfect model from which the

principles and rules of the epic art were to be drawn, and by

which all similar works were to be judged, so this great

political critic appears to have viewed the Constitution of

England as the standard, or to use his own expression, as the

mirror of political liberty; and to have delivered, in the form

of elementary truths, the several characteristic principles of

that particular system. That we may be sure, then, not to mistake

his meaning in this case, let us recur to the source from which

the maxim was drawn.
                        On the slightest view of the British

Constitution, we must perceive that the legislative, executive,

and judiciary departments are by no means totally separate and

distinct from each other. The executive magistrate forms an

integral part of the legislative authority. He alone has the

prerogative of making treaties with foreign sovereigns, which,

when made, have, under certain limitations, the force of

legislative acts. All the members of the judiciary department are

appointed by him, can be removed by him on the address of the two

Houses of Parliament, and form, when he pleases to consult them,

one of his constitutional councils. One branch of the legislative

department forms also a great constitutional council to the

executive chief, as, on another hand, it is the sole depositary

of judicial power in cases of impeachment, and is invested with

the supreme appellate jurisdiction in all other cases. The

judges, again, are so far connected with the legislative

department as often to attend and participate in its

deliberations, though not admitted to a legislative vote. From

these facts, by which Montesquieu was guided, it may clearly be

inferred that, in saying "There can be no liberty where the

legislative and executive powers are united in the same person,

or body of magistrates," or, "if the power of judging be not

separated from the legislative and executive powers," he did not

mean that these departments ought to have no PARTIAL AGENCY in,

or no CONTROL over, the acts of each other. His meaning, as his

own words import, and still more conclusively as illustrated by

the example in his eye, can amount to no more than this, that

where the WHOLE power of one department is exercised by the same

hands which possess the WHOLE power of another department, the

fundamental principles of a free constitution are subverted. This

would have been the case in the constitution examined by him, if

the king, who is the sole executive magistrate, had possessed

also the complete legislative power, or the supreme

administration of justice; or if the entire legislative body had

possessed the supreme judiciary, or the supreme executive

authority. This, however, is not among the vices of that

constitution. The magistrate in whom the whole executive power

resides cannot of himself make a law, though he can put a

negative on every law; nor administer justice in person, though

he has the appointment of those who do administer it. The judges

can exercise no executive prerogative, though they are shoots

from the executive stock; nor any legislative function, though

they may be advised with by the legislative councils. The entire

legislature can perform no judiciary act, though by the joint act

of two of its branches the judges may be removed from their

offices, and though one of its branches is possessed of the

judicial power in the last resort. The entire legislature, again,

can exercise no executive prerogative, though one of its branches

constitutes the supreme executive magistracy, and another, on the

impeachment of a third, can try and condemn all the subordinate

officers in the executive department. The reasons on which

Montesquieu grounds his maxim are a further demonstration of his

meaning. "When the legislative and executive powers are united

in the same person or body," says he, "there can be no liberty,

because apprehensions may arise lest THE SAME monarch or senate

should ENACT tyrannical laws to EXECUTE them in a tyrannical

manner. " Again: "Were the power of judging joined with the

legislative, the life and liberty of the subject would be exposed

to arbitrary control, for THE JUDGE would then be THE LEGISLATOR.

Were it joined to the executive power, THE JUDGE might behave

with all the violence of AN OPPRESSOR. " Some of these reasons

are more fully explained in other passages; but briefly stated as

they are here, they sufficiently establish the meaning which we

have put on this celebrated maxim of this celebrated author.


If we look into the constitutions of the several States, we find

that, notwithstanding the emphatical and, in some instances, the

unqualified terms in which this axiom has been laid down, there

is not a single instance in which the several departments of

power have been kept absolutely separate and distinct. New

Hampshire, whose constitution was the last formed, seems to have

been fully aware of the impossibility and inexpediency of

avoiding any mixture whatever of these departments, and has

qualified the doctrine by declaring "that the legislative,

executive, and judiciary powers ought to be kept as separate

from, and independent of, each other AS THE NATURE OF A FREE

GOVERNMENT WILL ADMIT; OR AS IS CONSISTENT WITH THAT CHAIN OF

CONNECTION THAT BINDS THE WHOLE FABRIC OF THE CONSTITUTION IN ONE

INDISSOLUBLE BOND OF UNITY AND AMITY. " Her constitution

accordingly mixes these departments in several respects. The

Senate, which is a branch of the legislative department, is also

a judicial tribunal for the trial of impeachments. The

President, who is the head of the executive department, is the

presiding member also of the Senate; and, besides an equal vote

in all cases, has a casting vote in case of a tie. The executive

head is himself eventually elective every year by the

legislative department, and his council is every year chosen by

and from the members of the same department. Several of the

officers of state are also appointed by the legislature. And the

members of the judiciary department are appointed by the

executive department. The constitution of Massachusetts has

observed a sufficient though less pointed caution, in expressing

this fundamental article of liberty. It declares "that the

legislative department shall never exercise the executive and

judicial powers, or either of them; the executive shall never

exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either of them;

the judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive

powers, or either of them. " This declaration corresponds

precisely with the doctrine of Montesquieu, as it has been

explained, and is not in a single point violated by the plan of

the convention. It goes no farther than to prohibit any one of

the entire departments from exercising the powers of another

department. In the very Constitution to which it is prefixed, a

partial mixture of powers has been admitted. The executive

magistrate has a qualified negative on the legislative body, and

the Senate, which is a part of the legislature, is a court of

impeachment for members both of the executive and judiciary

departments. The members of the judiciary department, again, are

appointable by the executive department, and removable by the

same authority on the address of the two legislative branches.

Lastly, a number of the officers of government are annually

appointed by the legislative department. As the appointment to

offices, particularly executive offices, is in its nature an

executive function, the compilers of the Constitution have, in

this last point at least, violated the rule established by

themselves. I pass over the constitutions of Rhode Island and

Connecticut, because they were formed prior to the Revolution,

and even before the principle under examination had become an

object of political attention. The constitution of New York

contains no declaration on this subject; but appears very

clearly to have been framed with an eye to the danger of

improperly blending the different departments. It gives,

nevertheless, to the executive magistrate, a partial control over

the legislative department; and, what is more, gives a like

control to the judiciary department; and even blends the

executive and judiciary departments in the exercise of this

control. In its council of appointment members of the

legislative are associated with the executive authority, in the

appointment of officers, both executive and judiciary. And its

court for the trial of impeachments and correction of errors is

to consist of one branch of the legislature and the principal

members of the judiciary department. The constitution of New

Jersey has blended the different powers of government more than

any of the preceding. The governor, who is the executive

magistrate, is appointed by the legislature; is chancellor and

ordinary, or surrogate of the State; is a member of the Supreme

Court of Appeals, and president, with a casting vote, of one of

the legislative branches. The same legislative branch acts again

as executive council of the governor, and with him constitutes

the Court of Appeals. The members of the judiciary department are

appointed by the legislative department and removable by one

branch of it, on the impeachment of the other. According to the

constitution of Pennsylvania, the president, who is the head of

the executive department, is annually elected by a vote in which

the legislative department predominates. In conjunction with an

executive council, he appoints the members of the judiciary

department, and forms a court of impeachment for trial of all

officers, judiciary as well as executive. The judges of the

Supreme Court and justices of the peace seem also to be removable

by the legislature; and the executive power of pardoning in

certain cases, to be referred to the same department. The members

of the executive council are made EX-OFFICIO justices of peace

throughout the State. In Delaware, the chief executive magistrate

is annually elected by the legislative department. The speakers

of the two legislative branches are vice-presidents in the

executive department. The executive chief, with six others,

appointed, three by each of the legislative branches constitutes

the Supreme Court of Appeals; he is joined with the legislative

department in the appointment of the other judges. Throughout the

States, it appears that the members of the legislature may at the

same time be justices of the peace; in this State, the members of

one branch of it are EX-OFFICIO justices of the peace; as are

also the members of the executive council. The principal officers

of the executive department are appointed by the legislative; and

one branch of the latter forms a court of impeachments. All

officers may be removed on address of the legislature. Maryland

has adopted the maxim in the most unqualified terms; declaring

that the legislative, executive, and judicial powers of

government ought to be forever separate and distinct from each

other. Her constitution, notwithstanding, makes the executive

magistrate appointable by the legislative department; and the

members of the judiciary by the executive department. The

language of Virginia is still more pointed on this subject. Her

constitution declares, "that the legislative, executive, and

judiciary departments shall be separate and distinct; so that

neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other; nor

shall any person exercise the powers of more than one of them at

the same time, except that the justices of county courts shall be

eligible to either House of Assembly. " Yet we find not only

this express exception, with respect to the members of the

inferior courts, but that the chief magistrate, with his

executive council, are appointable by the legislature; that two

members of the latter are triennially displaced at the pleasure

of the legislature; and that all the principal offices, both

executive and judiciary, are filled by the same department. The

executive prerogative of pardon, also, is in one case vested in

the legislative department. The constitution of North Carolina,

which declares "that the legislative, executive, and supreme

judicial powers of government ought to be forever separate and

distinct from each other," refers, at the same time, to the

legislative department, the appointment not only of the executive

chief, but all the principal officers within both that and the

judiciary department. In South Carolina, the constitution makes

the executive magistracy eligible by the legislative department.

It gives to the latter, also, the appointment of the members of

the judiciary department, including even justices of the peace

and sheriffs; and the appointment of officers in the executive

department, down to captains in the army and navy of the State.

In the constitution of Georgia, where it is declared "that the

legislative, executive, and judiciary departments shall be

separate and distinct, so that neither exercise the powers

properly belonging to the other," we find that the executive

department is to be filled by appointments of the legislature;

and the executive prerogative of pardon to be finally exercised

by the same authority. Even justices of the peace are to be

appointed by the legislature. In citing these cases, in which

the legislative, executive, and judiciary departments have not

been kept totally separate and distinct, I wish not to be

regarded as an advocate for the particular organizations of the

several State governments. I am fully aware that among the many

excellent principles which they exemplify, they carry strong

marks of the haste, and still stronger of the inexperience, under

which they were framed. It is but too obvious that in some

instances the fundamental principle under consideration has been

violated by too great a mixture, and even an actual

consolidation, of the different powers; and that in no instance

has a competent provision been made for maintaining in practice

the separation delineated on paper. What I have wished to evince

is, that the charge brought against the proposed Constitution, of

violating the sacred maxim of free government, is warranted

neither by the real meaning annexed to that maxim by its author,

nor by the sense in which it has hitherto been understood in

America. This interesting subject will be resumed in the ensuing

paper.

To the People of the State of New York:

IT WAS shown in the last paper that the political apothegm there

examined does not require that the legislative, executive, and

judiciary departments should be wholly unconnected with each

other. I shall undertake, in the next place, to show that unless

these departments be so far connected and blended as to give to

each a constitutional control over the others, the degree of

separation which the maxim requires, as essential to a free

government, can never in practice be duly maintained. It is

agreed on all sides, that the powers properly belonging to one of

the departments ought not to be directly and completely

administered by either of the other departments. It is equally

evident, that none of them ought to possess, directly or

indirectly, an overruling influence over the others, in the

administration of their respective powers. It will not be denied,

that power is of an encroaching nature, and that it ought to be

effectually restrained from passing the limits assigned to it.

After discriminating, therefore, in theory, the several classes

of power, as they may in their nature be legislative, executive,

or judiciary, the next and most difficult task is to provide some

practical security for each, against the invasion of the others.

What this security ought to be, is the great problem to be

solved. Will it be sufficient to mark, with precision, the

boundaries of these departments, in the constitution of the

government, and to trust to these parchment barriers against the

encroaching spirit of power? This is the security which appears

to have been principally relied on by the compilers of most of

the American constitutions. But experience assures us, that the

efficacy of the provision has been greatly overrated; and that

some more adequate defense is indispensably necessary for the

more feeble, against the more powerful, members of the

government. The legislative department is everywhere extending

the sphere of its activity, and drawing all power into its

impetuous vortex. The founders of our republics have so much

merit for the wisdom which they have displayed, that no task can

be less pleasing than that of pointing out the errors into which

they have fallen. A respect for truth, however, obliges us to

remark, that they seem never for a moment to have turned their

eyes from the danger to liberty from the overgrown and

all-grasping prerogative of an hereditary magistrate, supported

and fortified by an hereditary branch of the legislative

authority. They seem never to have recollected the danger from

legislative usurpations, which, by assembling all power in the

same hands, must lead to the same tyranny as is threatened by

executive usurpations. In a government where numerous and

extensive prerogatives are placed in the hands of an hereditary

monarch, the executive department is very justly regarded as the

source of danger, and watched with all the jealousy which a zeal

for liberty ought to inspire. In a democracy, where a multitude

of people exercise in person the legislative functions, and are

continually exposed, by their incapacity for regular deliberation

and concerted measures, to the ambitious intrigues of their

executive magistrates, tyranny may well be apprehended, on some

favorable emergency, to start up in the same quarter. But in a

representative republic, where the executive magistracy is

carefully limited; both in the extent and the duration of its

power; and where the legislative power is exercised by an

assembly, which is inspired, by a supposed influence over the

people, with an intrepid confidence in its own strength; which is

sufficiently numerous to feel all the passions which actuate a

multitude, yet not so numerous as to be incapable of pursuing the

objects of its passions, by means which reason prescribes; it is

against the enterprising ambition of this department that the

people ought to indulge all their jealousy and exhaust all their

precautions. The legislative department derives a superiority in

our governments from other circumstances. Its constitutional

powers being at once more extensive, and less susceptible of

precise limits, it can, with the greater facility, mask, under

complicated and indirect measures, the encroachments which it

makes on the co-ordinate departments. It is not unfrequently a

question of real nicety in legislative bodies, whether the

operation of a particular measure will, or will not, extend

beyond the legislative sphere. On the other side, the executive

power being restrained within a narrower compass, and being more

simple in its nature, and the judiciary being described by

landmarks still less uncertain, projects of usurpation by either

of these departments would immediately betray and defeat

themselves. Nor is this all: as the legislative department alone

has access to the pockets of the people, and has in some

constitutions full discretion, and in all a prevailing influence,

over the pecuniary rewards of those who fill the other

departments, a dependence is thus created in the latter, which

gives still greater facility to encroachments of the former. I

have appealed to our own experience for the truth of what I

advance on this subject. Were it necessary to verify this

experience by particular proofs, they might be multiplied

without end. I might find a witness in every citizen who has

shared in, or been attentive to, the course of public

administrations. I might collect vouchers in abundance from the

records and archives of every State in the Union. But as a more

concise, and at the same time equally satisfactory, evidence, I

will refer to the example of two States, attested by two

unexceptionable authorities. The first example is that of

Virginia, a State which, as we have seen, has expressly declared

in its constitution, that the three great departments ought not

to be intermixed. The authority in support of it is Mr.

Jefferson, who, besides his other advantages for remarking the

operation of the government, was himself the chief magistrate of

it. In order to convey fully the ideas with which his experience

had impressed him on this subject, it will be necessary to quote

a passage of some length from his very interesting "Notes on the

State of Virginia," p. 195. "All the powers of government,

legislative, executive, and judiciary, result to the legislative

body. The concentrating these in the same hands, is precisely the

definition of despotic government. It will be no alleviation,

that these powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands, and

not by a single one. One hundred and seventy-three despots would

surely be as oppressive as one. Let those who doubt it, turn

their eyes on the republic of Venice. As little will it avail us,

that they are chosen by ourselves. An ELECTIVE DESPOTISM was not

the government we fought for; but one which should not only be

founded on free principles, but in which the powers of government

should be so divided and balanced among several bodies of

magistracy, as that no one could transcend their legal limits,

without being effectually checked and restrained by the others.

For this reason, that convention which passed the ordinance of

government, laid its foundation on this basis, that the

legislative, executive, and judiciary departments should be

separate and distinct, so that no person should exercise the

powers of more than one of them at the same time. BUT NO BARRIER

WAS PROVIDED BETWEEN THESE SEVERAL POWERS. The judiciary and the

executive members were left dependent on the legislative for

their subsistence in office, and some of them for their

continuance in it. If, therefore, the legislature assumes

executive and judiciary powers, no opposition is likely to be

made; nor, if made, can be effectual; because in that case they

may put their proceedings into the form of acts of Assembly,

which will render them obligatory on the other branches. They

have accordingly, IN MANY instances, DECIDED RIGHTS which should

have been left to JUDICIARY CONTROVERSY, and THE DIRECTION OF THE

EXECUTIVE, DURING THE WHOLE TIME OF THEIR SESSION, IS BECOMING

HABITUAL AND FAMILIAR. "The other State which I shall take for

an example is Pennsylvania; and the other authority, the Council

of Censors, which assembled in the years 1783 and 1784. A part of

the duty of this body, as marked out by the constitution, was

"to inquire whether the constitution had been preserved

inviolate in every part; and whether the legislative and

executive branches of government had performed their duty as

guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or exercised,

other or greater powers than they are entitled to by the

constitution. " In the execution of this trust, the council were

necessarily led to a comparison of both the legislative and

executive proceedings, with the constitutional powers of these

departments; and from the facts enumerated, and to the truth of

most of which both sides in the council subscribed, it appears

that the constitution had been flagrantly violated by the

legislature in a variety of important instances. A great number

of laws had been passed, violating, without any apparent

necessity, the rule requiring that all bills of a public nature

shall be previously printed for the consideration of the people;

although this is one of the precautions chiefly relied on by the

constitution against improper acts of legislature. The

constitutional trial by jury had been violated, and powers

assumed which had not been delegated by the constitution.

Executive powers had been usurped. The salaries of the judges,

which the constitution expressly requires to be fixed, had been

occasionally varied; and cases belonging to the judiciary

department frequently drawn within legislative cognizance and

determination. Those who wish to see the several particulars

falling under each of these heads, may consult the journals of

the council, which are in print. Some of them, it will be found,

may be imputable to peculiar circumstances connected with the

war; but the greater part of them may be considered as the

spontaneous shoots of an ill-constituted government. It appears,

also, that the executive department had not been innocent of

frequent breaches of the constitution. There are three

observations, however, which ought to be made on this head:

FIRST, a great proportion of the instances were either

immediately produced by the necessities of the war, or

recommended by Congress or the commander-in-chief; SECONDLY, in

most of the other instances, they conformed either to the

declared or the known sentiments of the legislative department;

THIRDLY, the executive department of Pennsylvania is

distinguished from that of the other States by the number of

members composing it. In this respect, it has as much affinity

to a legislative assembly as to an executive council. And being

at once exempt from the restraint of an individual responsibility

for the acts of the body, and deriving confidence from mutual

example and joint influence, unauthorized measures would, of

course, be more freely hazarded, than where the executive

department is administered by a single hand, or by a few hands.

The conclusion which I am warranted in drawing from these

observations is, that a mere demarcation on parchment of the

constitutional limits of the several departments, is not a

sufficient guard against those encroachments which lead to a

tyrannical concentration of all the powers of government in the

same hands.

To the People of the State of New York:

THE remaining charge against the House of Representatives, which

I am to examine, is grounded on a supposition that the number of

members will not be augmented from time to time, as the progress

of population may demand. It has been admitted, that this

objection, if well supported, would have great weight. The

following observations will show that, like most other objections

against the Constitution, it can only proceed from a partial view

of the subject, or from a jealousy which discolors and disfigures

every object which is beheld. 1. Those who urge the objection

seem not to have recollected that the federal Constitution will

not suffer by a comparison with the State constitutions, in the

security provided for a gradual augmentation of the number of

representatives. The number which is to prevail in the first

instance is declared to be temporary. Its duration is limited to

the short term of three years. Within every successive term of

ten years a census of inhabitants is to be repeated. The

unequivocal objects of these regulations are, first, to readjust,

from time to time, the apportionment of representatives to the

number of inhabitants, under the single exception that each State

shall have one representative at least; secondly, to augment the

number of representatives at the same periods, under the sole

limitation that the whole number shall not exceed one for every

thirty thousand inhabitants. If we review the constitutions of

the several States, we shall find that some of them contain no

determinate regulations on this subject, that others correspond

pretty much on this point with the federal Constitution, and that

the most effectual security in any of them is resolvable into a

mere directory provision. 2. As far as experience has taken place

on this subject, a gradual increase of representatives under the

State constitutions has at least kept pace with that of the

constituents, and it appears that the former have been as ready

to concur in such measures as the latter have been to call for

them. 3. There is a peculiarity in the federal Constitution which

insures a watchful attention in a majority both of the people and

of their representatives to a constitutional augmentation of the

latter. The peculiarity lies in this, that one branch of the

legislature is a representation of citizens, the other of the

States: in the former, consequently, the larger States will have

most weight; in the latter, the advantage will be in favor of the

smaller States. From this circumstance it may with certainty be

inferred that the larger States will be strenuous advocates for

increasing the number and weight of that part of the legislature

in which their influence predominates. And it so happens that

four only of the largest will have a majority of the whole votes

in the House of Representatives. Should the representatives or

people, therefore, of the smaller States oppose at any time a

reasonable addition of members, a coalition of a very few States

will be sufficient to overrule the opposition; a coalition which,

notwithstanding the rivalship and local prejudices which might

prevent it on ordinary occasions, would not fail to take place,

when not merely prompted by common interest, but justified by

equity and the principles of the Constitution. It may be

alleged, perhaps, that the Senate would be prompted by like

motives to an adverse coalition; and as their concurrence would

be indispensable, the just and constitutional views of the other

branch might be defeated. This is the difficulty which has

probably created the most serious apprehensions in the jealous

friends of a numerous representation. Fortunately it is among

the difficulties which, existing only in appearance, vanish on a

close and accurate inspection. The following reflections will,

if I mistake not, be admitted to be conclusive and satisfactory

on this point. Notwithstanding the equal authority which will

subsist between the two houses on all legislative subjects,

except the originating of money bills, it cannot be doubted that

the House, composed of the greater number of members, when

supported by the more powerful States, and speaking the known and

determined sense of a majority of the people, will have no small

advantage in a question depending on the comparative firmness of

the two houses. This advantage must be increased by the

consciousness, felt by the same side of being supported in its

demands by right, by reason, and by the Constitution; and the

consciousness, on the opposite side, of contending against the

force of all these solemn considerations. It is farther to be

considered, that in the gradation between the smallest and

largest States, there are several, which, though most likely in

general to arrange themselves among the former are too little

removed in extent and population from the latter, to second an

opposition to their just and legitimate pretensions. Hence it is

by no means certain that a majority of votes, even in the

Senate, would be unfriendly to proper augmentations in the number

of representatives. It will not be looking too far to add, that

the senators from all the new States may be gained over to the

just views of the House of Representatives, by an expedient too

obvious to be overlooked. As these States will, for a great

length of time, advance in population with peculiar rapidity,

they will be interested in frequent reapportionments of the

representatives to the number of inhabitants. The large States,

therefore, who will prevail in the House of Representatives, will

have nothing to do but to make reapportionments and augmentations

mutually conditions of each other; and the senators from all the

most growing States will be bound to contend for the latter, by

the interest which their States will feel in the former. These

considerations seem to afford ample security on this subject, and

ought alone to satisfy all the doubts and fears which have been

indulged with regard to it. Admitting, however, that they should

all be insufficient to subdue the unjust policy of the smaller

States, or their predominant influence in the councils of the

Senate, a constitutional and infallible resource still remains

with the larger States, by which they will be able at all times

to accomplish their just purposes. The House of Representatives

cannot only refuse, but they alone can propose, the supplies

requisite for the support of government. They, in a word, hold

the purse that powerful instrument by which we behold, in the

history of the British Constitution, an infant and humble

representation of the people gradually enlarging the sphere of

its activity and importance, and finally reducing, as far as it

seems to have wished, all the overgrown prerogatives of the other

branches of the government. This power over the purse may, in

fact, be regarded as the most complete and effectual weapon with

which any constitution can arm the immediate representatives of

the people, for obtaining a redress of every grievance, and for

carrying into effect every just and salutary measure. But will

not the House of Representatives be as much interested as the

Senate in maintaining the government in its proper functions, and

will they not therefore be unwilling to stake its existence or

its reputation on the pliancy of the Senate? Or, if such a trial

of firmness between the two branches were hazarded, would not the

one be as likely first to yield as the other? These questions

will create no difficulty with those who reflect that in all

cases the smaller the number, and the more permanent and

conspicuous the station, of men in power, the stronger must be

the interest which they will individually feel in whatever

concerns the government. Those who represent the dignity of their

country in the eyes of other nations, will be particularly

sensible to every prospect of public danger, or of dishonorable

stagnation in public affairs. To those causes we are to ascribe

the continual triumph of the British House of Commons over the

other branches of the government, whenever the engine of a money

bill has been employed. An absolute inflexibility on the side of

the latter, although it could not have failed to involve every

department of the state in the general confusion, has neither

been apprehended nor experienced. The utmost degree of firmness

that can be displayed by the federal Senate or President, will

not be more than equal to a resistance in which they will be

supported by constitutional and patriotic principles. In this

review of the Constitution of the House of Representatives, I

have passed over the circumstances of economy, which, in the

present state of affairs, might have had some effect in lessening

the temporary number of representatives, and a disregard of which

would probably have been as rich a theme of declamation against

the Constitution as has been shown by the smallness of the number

proposed. I omit also any remarks on the difficulty which might

be found, under present circumstances, in engaging in the federal

service a large number of such characters as the people will

probably elect. One observation, however, I must be permitted to

add on this subject as claiming, in my judgment, a very serious

attention. It is, that in all legislative assemblies the greater

the number composing them may be, the fewer will be the men who

will in fact direct their proceedings. In the first place, the

more numerous an assembly may be, of whatever characters

composed, the greater is known to be the ascendency of passion

over reason. In the next place, the larger the number, the

greater will be the proportion of members of limited information

and of weak capacities. Now, it is precisely on characters of

this description that the eloquence and address of the few are

known to act with all their force. In the ancient republics,

where the whole body of the people assembled in person, a single

orator, or an artful statesman, was generally seen to rule with

as complete a sway as if a sceptre had been placed in his single

hand. On the same principle, the more multitudinous a

representative assembly may be rendered, the more it will partake

of the infirmities incident to collective meetings of the people.

Ignorance will be the dupe of cunning, and passion the slave of

sophistry and declamation. The people can never err more than in

supposing that by multiplying their representatives beyond a

certain limit, they strengthen the barrier against the government

of a few. Experience will forever admonish them that, on the

contrary, AFTER SECURING A SUFFICIENT NUMBER FOR THE PURPOSES OF

SAFETY, OF LOCAL INFORMATION, AND OF DIFFUSIVE SYMPATHY WITH THE

WHOLE SOCIETY, they will counteract their own views by every

addition to their representatives. The countenance of the

government may become more democratic, but the soul that animates

it will be more oligarchic. The machine will be enlarged, but the

fewer, and often the more secret, will be the springs by which

its motions are directed. As connected with the objection against

the number of representatives, may properly be here noticed, that

which has been suggested against the number made competent for

legislative business. It has been said that more than a majority

ought to have been required for a quorum; and in particular

cases, if not in all, more than a majority of a quorum for a

decision. That some advantages might have resulted from such a

precaution, cannot be denied. It might have been an additional

shield to some particular interests, and another obstacle

generally to hasty and partial measures. But these considerations

are outweighed by the inconveniences in the opposite scale. In

all cases where justice or the general good might require new

laws to be passed, or active measures to be pursued, the

fundamental principle of free government would be reversed. It

would be no longer the majority that would rule: the power would

be transferred to the minority. Were the defensive privilege

limited to particular cases, an interested minority might take

advantage of it to screen themselves from equitable sacrifices to

the general weal, or, in particular emergencies, to extort

unreasonable indulgences. Lastly, it would facilitate and foster

the baneful practice of secessions; a practice which has shown

itself even in States where a majority only is required; a

practice subversive of all the principles of order and regular

government; a practice which leads more directly to public

convulsions, and the ruin of popular governments, than any other

which has yet been displayed among us.