WOAH. What? That is our reading week and I might be out of town, unknown as of yet. What are you doing here?
Ahaha, I will definitely try. I'll get my details sorted. Message me your plans?
Princeton, this fall. Let's make it happen.
Will you drive me to it again? Ahaha, this time we go to Dennys afterwards.
Also, may or may not have watched every archer episode since break hit.
and don't pretend you didn't enjoy Maxson and I's running commentary.
aight, no screaming if you drive. Yup, baboo is hard to beat.
Getting you all nostalgic fogg?
You better not show your face on campus in September. It might get ugly
This article was definitely interesting, but I really enjoyed some of the older stuff I was linked to. Sort of harkens back to a typical Indian Professor's melodrama.
God damn, thats quick...see ya soon.
Ahaha, YES! Come visit the P-ton area, its time to recreate that Ganga Mahal vibe.
AWWWW. Each day without you is truly a test of my emotional fortitude Mr. Kreger.
Awww, aint that just precious. We could skype dance party... how about right now!
I sincerely hope this doesn't give Modi a green light. I would think his Gujarat record would keep most of the non-BJP public from seeing him in a redeeming light, but I guess never underestimate Indian politics.
Ahaha, you would find this.
Dawwww, til June bud.
Wow. The two of you together is a lethal pairing.
Hot damn. She's awesome. My paper went stated that I though craft brewers could fight off this kind of competition, ehhh, but I don't know these guys are for real.
Crack an egg in that stuff you won't be able to find a happier man than me.
Somewhere around 1AM.
So many good things on one stage at once. Ahahaha. But honestly, Franco could have gone with a harder question. I mean, just listing the Valar is pretty basic.
Damn, thats truly a killer feed. This one and this one both fantastic.
my god.
Hahaha, christ, they are clever.
HAhaha, Gotta let me be me... yo.
Hmm, good writer for sure, but I disagree with the general premise that the school should be co-ed. My attraction to it was similar to her's. To get away from the distractions and lose myself in a difficult and intense contemplative process. If the school is co-ed it lacks the monastic feel essential for this sort of focus. We can talk more about it later, but thanks for the article. Got me all nostalgic.
I think that was the right decision in this case. The debate got so vitriolic in the 90's that it almost closed down the school because donors were pulling funding. If the Telluride foundation really felt strongly about giving girls the chance a such an education I think starting another different school that is only female would be the best option. It preserves the integrity of the education and keeps trustee fighting at a minimum.
I don't think "separate but equal" really applies simply because the type of education this girl is looking for is impossible to produce in a co-ed environment. Unlike racial segregation where inclusion did not diminish the services and in fact enhanced the general wellbeing of all associated, the quality of the school is partially based on that exclusionary principle.
Thank You for the birthday wishes! Feeling very fortunate to call such a quality group of people my friends.