are those sources of value?
I think they are just indicators of "success".
yah.
but yah I agree.
yah, most of those are just off shoots or doing something really impactful.
like if you are really influencing the lives of other people (positive or negative).
those indicators will flock to you.
I think money is just a matter of having enough to not have to worry about your next meal.
to travel and read.
and support loved ones.
and I am more convinced that a wholehearted and honest relationship with a girl is something that is both and indicator of sucess and is deeply healthy.
ahhh.
hmm jaded.
I think that exists.
my parents are quite good at it.
they push and support each other in ways that prompt intellectual expansion and personal reflection that would not happen otherwise.
I think those are and should always be fundamental to life.
hmmm, that is a tough question for me.
and one I struggle with.
I think that with as many problems as there are in the world right now.
each person has some obligation to use their learing to give back to those who have made that learning possible.
but at what point in one life does the knowledge become applicable or should be given out is a hard question to answer.
and is entirely individual.
I think art for its own sake is ok though.
like beauty for and by the creator sustains and nurtures their very existence.
ahh.
so like.
when should your focus switch primarily from learning to helping others/applying that learning.
the learning should never stop, but how and when it is used to give back is the tough quetsion.
yah. I think art can be just for oneself.
but learning is inherently for others.
and I guess I differentiate between the two.
though, "learning" and "art" have lots of gray areas in between them.
hey man I actually have to run.
gotta go grab some laundry.
but was good talking to you.
looking forward to seeing you in the fall, those late night dining hall conversations just don't happen in Shanghai.
say no until she apologizes about the thighs.
http://www.hercampus.com/school/georgetown/austin-bury-and-will-halle-return-winklevii-0.
Holy shit this is hilarious.
"I like how girls look when they’re wearing more rugged things, like they’re wearing guys’ clothes. Only on the upper body though.".
ahahaha,
good to see you're keepin it classy Will.
^lol. also that little comment threat just got out of control.
AHAHAHAHA.
should I bring some stuff back from CO for you daway.
http://www.theblazerbros.com/#!untitled/zoom/cee5/image1a6d.
classic newcomet.
Come on hannah.
lol. Hannah. if they let you off the bench.
also Ella where is that picture?
HAHAHHA. classy.
http://www.betcheslovethis.com/article/funniest-quotes-the-hills.
for you will.
Was on the newsfeed. What can I say.
Im getting him the wristband.
Yah, I can come. I have no real plans for drinking yet, but that would be a good place to start. Also, Christine is coming into town. I can put Will in my common room, but if one of you guys has a more comfortable arrangements I am sure he would appreciate it.
Sounds like a good plan.
sounds good. Will couldn't miss Sat morning practice so he will arrive at palmer square at 7:30 (just FYI).
and I'll bring that crew, no problem.
I got will and christine on cannon, tower, and can get them into cloister.
any other place tonight?
ehhh, idk. i mean he is just double listed.
I feel ba calling in more of a favor than I already did for the cannon one ella.
*bad.
and phoebe isn't on yet either?
ahhh, damn. ok. lemme see I think the deadline was 7:30.
