Home 
Search 
Collections 
Journals 
About 
Contact us 
My IOPscience 
A new device concept for directly modulating spinal cord pathways: initial in vivo  experimental 
results 
This content has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text. 
View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage  for more 
Download details: 
IP Address: 147.26.103.71 
This content was downloaded on 12/07/2014 at 10:13 
Please note that terms and conditions apply. 

========1========

IOP PUBLISHING 
PHYSIOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT 
Physiol. Meas. 33 (2012) 2003–2015 
doi:10.1088/0967-3334/33/12/2003 
A new device concept for directly modulating spinal cord pathways: initial in vivo experimental results 
Oliver Flouty1, Hiroyuki Oya1, Hiroto Kawasaki1, Saul Wilson1,1 
Chandan G Reddy , Nicholas D Jeffery2, Timothy J Brennan3,4 
Katherine N Gibson-Corley , Marcel Utz5, George T Gillies5,61,7 
and Matthew A Howard III 
1 
Department of Neurosurgery, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA 2 
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA 3 
Department of Anesthesia, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA 4 
Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA 5 
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA 
6 
Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA 
E-mail: matthew-howard@uiowa.edu 
Received 26 June 2012, accepted for publication 28 September 2012 Published 15 November 2012 
Online at stacks.iop.org/PM/33/2003 
Abstract 
We describe a novel spinal cord (SC) stimulator that is designed to overcome a major shortcoming of existing stimulator devices: their restricted capacity to selectively activate targeted axons within the dorsal columns. This device overcomes that limitation by delivering electrical stimuli directly to the pial surface of the SC. Our goal in testing this device was to measure its ability to physiologically activate the SC and examine its capacity to modulate somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) triggered by peripheral stimulation. In this acute study on adult sheep (n = 7), local ﬁeld potentials were recorded from a grid placed in the subdural space of the right hemisphere during electrical stimulation of the left tibial nerve and the spinal cord. Large amplitude SSEPs (>200 μV) in response to SC stimulation were consistently obtained at stimulation strengths well below the thresholds inducing neural injury. Moreover, stimulation of the dorsal columns with signals employed routinely by devices in standard clinical use, e.g., 50 Hz, 0.2 ms pulse width, produced long-lasting changes (>4.5 h) in the SSEP patterns produced by subsequent tibial nerve stimulation. The results of these acute experiments demonstrate that this device can be safely secured to the SC surface and effectively activate somatosensory pathways. 
Keywords: neuromodulation, spinal cord stimulation, intradural device 
(Some ﬁgures may appear in colour only in the online journal) 
7 
Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed. 
0967-3334/12/122003+13$33.00 © 2012 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine Printed in the UK & the USA 2003 

========2========

2004 
O Flouty et al 
Introduction 
Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) was ﬁrst employed clinically in 1967 (Shealyet al 1967, 1970). This novel surgical treatment was developed as a therapeutic extrapolation of the Melzack and Wall ‘gate theory’ of pain modulation (Melzack and Wall 1965), and SCS devices were placed initially in cancer patients suffering from medically refractory pain. Over the ensuing decades the clinical indications for SCS and the devices themselves have evolved signiﬁcantly (Atkinson et al 2011). At present, over 35 000 SCS devices are surgically implanted each year in North America alone (Kumar and Bishop 2009), largely for treatment of medically refractory chronic pain, and there is now clear evidence that this approach indeed reduces certain chronic pain symptoms (Kumar et al 2007,Northet al 2007). 
The physiological mechanisms that mediate therapeutic effects of SCS are poorly understood and are the subject of extensive ongoing research (Linderoth and Meyerson 2010, Oakley and Prager 2002). One particularly useful research method has involved the development of computational biophysical models to study the distribution of electrical current densities within realistic representations of the human spinal canal and cord (Holsheimer2002, Struijk et al 1991). Models correlating electrical ﬁeld distributions with the locations of spinal cord pathways provide a conceptual framework that is used to inform the design of new devices and improve stimulation paradigms (Holsheimer and Wesselink1997,North2008). Given that close to half of all implanted patients do not experience signiﬁcant sustained beneﬁt from SCS, there is a pressing need for such improvements (Eldabe et al 2010, Taylor et al 2005). 
In this report, we describe a new device concept that is designed to overcome the most signiﬁcant deﬁciency of the present epidurally placed SCS devices: their limited capacity to selectively activate targeted axons within the spinal cord. The concept for the new intradural stimulator that we present here is intended to overcome this deﬁciency, allowing the neurosurgeon to selectively activate virtually any pathway within the spinal cord. A description of this concept from the general medical physics perspective is available elsewhere (Howard et al 2011a) as are the technical details of various preclinical testing protocols for it (Howard et al 2011b,Oyaet al 2012, Wilson et al 2012). We have also developed ﬁxation techniques used to position and stabilize this device (Gibson-Corely et al), which is termed the Iowa- PatchTM or I-Patch, on the surface of the spinal canal. In what follows, we present the results from the ﬁrst in vivo test of the neurosurgical implantation of an early I-Patch prototype onto the pial surface of the spinal cord in a large animal model. 
Materials and methods 
The I-Patch concept 
The I-Patch concept was designed to circumvent existing barriers to delivering electrical stimuli to select spinal cord pathways. One such barrier is the relatively high-conductivity cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) that surrounds the spinal cord. The electrical shunting effect of the CSF can be ameliorated signiﬁcantly by placing a very thin, malleable electrode array directly on the pial surface of the spinal cord, thus enabling selective activation of spinal cord pathways that are in close proximity to the spinal cord surface. In these ﬁrst in vivo studies, we chose to secure the implant to the surface of the spinal cord using a dentate ligament attachment technique (Gibson-Corely et al). In that arrangement, the surface-array electrodes would protrude approximately 1/3 mm from the underside of the I-Patch body and only their tips would be in direct contact with the pial surface, in order to accommodate the surface blood vessels and to allow for free movement during the spinal cord’s pulsations. 

========3========

New device for pathway modulation 2005 
(A) (B) 
(C) 
Figure 1. (A) Photograph of the prototype I-Patch device used in the ovine in vivo experiments (ventral view). There are nine electrodes mounted on the underside of the nearly transparent, 0.13 mm thick silicone ﬁlm, the arms of which were attached to the dural-construct, dentate ligament surrogates. The yellow circle highlights the contact used during in vivo stimulation. (B) The dura is reﬂected to reveal the pial surface of the ovine spinal cord. (C) The I-Patch in place on the spinal cord, with the attachment arms secured to the dural-construct dentate ligament surrogates by Weck clips. 
Our original design called for the clinical I-Patch to incorporate a receiver coil and microelectronics into the body of the device so that power and control signals could be conveyed to it wirelessly by an epidural transmitter (Howard et al 2011a, Song et al 2012). Wireless control of epidural neuromodulators and various neuroprostheses has been reported by a number of workers (Hsu et al 2011, Mandal and Sarpeshkar 2008, Sharma et al 2010) and the corresponding design requirements for an intradural device like the I-Patch are within the capabilities of existing microfabrication technology. However, because of the large development costs for such a system, we chose to perform our initial feasibility studies with a simpler wired version of the device. Our ﬁrst in vivo test results, described below, were obtained using a prototype designed speciﬁcally for acute experiments in anesthetized sheep, and the primary goal of our work was to measure I-Patch physiological activation threshold characteristics using electrical stimulation-induced somatosensory evoked potentials. 
Wired I-Patch 
The I-Patch devices were built to custom speciﬁcations by Evergreen Medical Technologies, LLC (St. Paul, MN, USA). The body of the wired I-Patch is constructed from 0.13 mm thick transparent silicone. As shown in ﬁgure 1(A), attachment arms for securing the device to the dentate ligaments extend laterally approximately 6 mm from either side of the body. There are nine hemispherical 90/10 platinum–iridium electrodes, nominally 0.5 mm in diameter, embedded into the I-Patch in a 3 × 3 rectangular grid that occupies 28 mm2, and which is designed to achieve the optimal coverage of the dorsal columns of the sheep spinal cord. The electrode leads are of 44 AWG (0.05 mm) MP35N wire with polyimide insulation, approximately 50 cm long. The leads are connected to a Tucker-Davis Technologies IZ2 stimulator (Alachua, FL, USA) which is able to apply signals to the electrodes over the range from 0.2 to 20 V. With reference to ﬁgure 1, the cathode for monopolar stimulation was placed over the midline dorsal surface of the spinal cord, an area heavily representing ascending sensory ﬁbers of the lower extremity (Smith and Deacon 1984). The anode electrode was 

========4========

2006 
O Flouty et al 
placed in subcutaneous tissue. The in situ impedance measurements for the electrodes ranged from 28 to 41 k. 
Experimental preparation 
Sheep (n = 7) were selected as the preferred I-Patch experimental animal model for several reasons. The size and conﬁguration of the sheep spinal cord and spinal canal are well suited for studies of I-Patch mechanics and investigations of electrical interface properties between electrode contacts and the spinal cord. Additionally, the anatomy and physiological properties of the sheep peripheral and central somatosensory systems are well described (Dolan and Nolan 2002,Floet al 2009, Ghazi and Gholami1993a, 1993b, Herrero and Headley 1995a, 1995b,1995c, Johnsonet al1974,Rose1942, Vialleet al2006, Wilson and Beerwinkle1986). The institutionally approved, acute, non-survival experiments described in this report were all carried out under general anesthesia: inhaled isoﬂuorane was used for induction and during the surgical dissections, followed by continuous infusion of propofol (0.4 mg kg−1 h−1) during experimentation and data acquisition. Body temperature and blood pressure were maintained within normal limits throughout the experiments. 
Following induction of anesthesia a right-sided hemicraniectomy was performed and the dura opened to expose the lateral surface of the hemisphere. Local ﬁeld potentials were recorded using a 3.3 × 2.1 cm, 60 contact grid array with an inter-contact spacing of 2.3 mm (Ad-Tech Medical Instruments, Racine, WI, USA) positioned over the somatosensory cortex. (The position of the array relative to the cortical surface and the numbering pattern for the contacts are shown in ﬁgure 3(A)). In two sheep, a multi-level thoracic laminectomy was performed centered at the T8–9 levels. The dura was incised and reﬂected to achieve broad exposure of the spinal cord. In one of these two sheep, the wired I-Patch was gently draped over the dorsal surface of the spinal cord and the dentate ligament attachment arms were secured to the lateral dura using polymeric Hem-o-lockTM clips (length = 5 mm, cross-section = 1 mm) (Teleﬂex Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC). A dural attachment technique was used because the sheep dentate ligament is too small to accurately replicate the anatomical properties of the human dentate ligament (Gibson-Corley et al). 
Following surgical exposure, a series of electrophysiological experiments was performed. In order to delineate the anatomical boundaries of the sheep somatosensory cortex and deﬁne baseline SSEP response characteristics, electrical stimuli were delivered through needle electrodes to the surgically exposed left tibial nerve in all seven sheep, while SSEPs were recorded from the right-sided cortical grid (constant current mode, 0.2 ms square wave, inter-stimulus interval = 1.4 s). The intensity of the tibial nerve electrical stimuli was systematically varied to determine SSEP threshold and study the effects of stimulus intensity on cortical responses. In one sheep, SSEPs were recorded in response to electrical stimuli delivered directly to the spinal cord through I-Patch electrode contacts (constant voltage mode, 0.2 ms square wave, inter-stimulus interval = 1.4 s). The intensity of I-Patch electrical stimuli was also systematically varied to determine SSEP thresholds. After these peripheral nerve and direct SCS thresholds were determined, an additional experiment was carried out to see how I-Patch electrical stimulation modulated the SSEP recorded in response to tibial nerve electrical stimulation. During this experiment, electrical stimuli were continuously delivered through the I-Patch (0.2 ms pulse width, 50 Hz pulse train, 15 min total duration). At the same time, SSEPs were recorded in response to tibial nerve electrical stimulation (0.2 ms pulse width, 0.5 Hz pulse train, 15 min total duration). 
In a separate supplementary experiment, a simple two-pole neurostimulator with a pair of hemispherical electrodes at its tip (see the Results section, ﬁgure 4(A)) was used to deliver 

========5========

New device for pathway modulation 2007 
monopolar constant voltage stimuli (1 and 9 V; 0.1 ms pulse width, ISI = 1.4, number of presentations = 80) to the medial aspect of the dorsal columns. The purpose of this experiment was to elucidate the low voltage requirements of the intradural approach and explore its capability to activate dorsal column ﬁbers when compared to the standard epidural approach. 
At the completion of the electrophysiological experiments the animal was sacriﬁced and the exposed spinal cord was resected and processed for histological analysis. The specimens were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldyhyde for 48 h, followed by secondary ﬁxation with 10% neutral buffered formalin for another 72 h. The spinal cord segments were serially cross-sectioned and routinely processed, embedded, further sectioned (4 μm), and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for histological examination. 
Results 
The surgical preparation was effective in achieving the required exposure of the right hemisphere of the brain, the T8–10 region of the spinal cord, and the left tibial nerve. Representative intraoperative photographs of spinal cord exposure and subsequent ﬁxation of the I-Patch are shown in ﬁgures 1(B) and (C), respectively. 
Large amplitude, tibial-nerve stimulation SSEPs were consistently recorded in all seven sheep, per the example shown in ﬁgure 2(A), over cortex abutting and immediately adjacent to the anterior suprasylvian sulcus, consistent with a prior report describing the location of sheep somatosensory cortex (Johnson et al 1974). Direct electrical stimulation of the spinal cord through the I-Patch resulted in SSEPs with cortical topographic distributions that conformed closely to those observed following tibial nerve stimulation (TNS), as shown in ﬁgure2(B). The midline position of the IPATCH contact (ﬁgure1(A)) allowed us to stimulate the medial region of the dorsal column which is predominantly carrying sensory input from the ipsilateral lower extremity (Smith and Deacon 1984). This in turn allowed subsequent comparison to, as well as modulating response from, TNS. At stimulation strengths well above the I-Patch threshold, the area of I-Patch stimulation-induced brain activation expanded into other cortical regions as well. Although the spatial distribution of cortex activation differed slightly for averaged evoked potential waveforms and spectro-temporal power displays, the stimulus intensity thresholds required to induce a response were the same for the two different analytical approaches. These threshold values required to achieve cortical activation with I-Patch electrical stimulation ranged from 3.0 to 3.5 V. Increasing I-Patch stimulus strength beyond threshold was associated with a ceiling effect whereby the magnitude of SSEP responses remained stable as stimulus intensities were incrementally increased. Full details of the ceiling threshold measurements and their biophysical interpretation will be published elsewhere (Flouty et al). 
Continuous activation of the I-Patch using stimulus parameters relevant to clinical SCS (50 Hz, 0.2 ms pulse width) markedly altered cortical evoked responses and high-gamma- band envelope in response to TNS (ﬁgures 3(B) and (C) respectively). This strong modulatory effect of I-Patch stimulation on somatosensory processing was even observed at stimulus strengths below threshold for generating an I-Patch stimulation-evoked cortical response. In general, the patterns of these modulatory effects were complex. For instance, a wide range of cortical response changes were noted, including decreases and increases in ECoG power, and alterations in averaged evoked potential waveform amplitudes and morphologies that differed across brain sites (ﬁgures 3(B), (C) and 5). Of note, high frequency stimulation (HFS) was able to attenuate and sometimes abolish high-gamma-band envelope peaks occurring approximately 100 ms after TNS, ﬁgure 3(C). These ﬁndings reﬂect the robust and complex effects of SCS on supraspinal processing of sensory stimuli. 

========6========

2008 
O Flouty et al 
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 2. (A) Average evoked waveforms in response to tibial nerve stimulation (TNS) (12 V, 0.2 ms pulse width, ISI = 1.4 s). (B) Average waveforms in response to I-Patch stimulation (12 V, 0.2 ms pulse width, ISI = 1.4 s). The dashed lines delineate the anterior suprasylvian and the sylvian sulci relative to the contact locations on the grid from which the respective waveforms were recorded. 
When comparing epidural with intradural stimulation, cortical activation was achieved at lower voltages with intradural stimulation (ﬁgure4). At 1 V average evoked potentials and high- gamma-band envelope were clearly observed with intradural but not with epidural placement of the neurostimulator. When the signal strength was increased to 5 V, both locations elicited a cortical response as seen by the average waveforms and high-gamma-band envelope curves. However, the magnitude of the response was higher when the neurostimulator was placed intradurally (ﬁgure 4(B)). Flouty et al present other data on and a more detailed comparison of these modes of stimulation. 
Histological analysis of the sheep spinal cord tissue directly under the I-Patch implants showed no evidence of neuronal cell loss, tissue disruption or demyelination. Blood vessels within the pia-arachnoid membranes in direct contact with the I-Patch device showed no evidence of thrombosis, as per the pathology ﬁnding shown in ﬁgure 6. 

========7========

New device for pathway modulation 2009 
(A) (B) 
(C) 
Figure 3. (A) Upper ﬁgure: Hemicraniectomy revealing the anterior suprasylvian sulcus (demarcated by a red inverted U) and the position of the recording array numbered contacts shown in yellow. Lower ﬁgure: tibial nerve exposure (asterisk marks the nerve). (B) Zoomed version of the average evoked potential results showing SSEPs in response to TNS before (blue trace) and after (red trace) high frequency stimulation (HFS). Vertical bars are placed to aid in appreciating the time course of the response (green bar represents stimulus onset). (C) Time-varying high-gamma-band envelope in response to TNS over the whole subdural grid (presented in A). Blue and red traces represent response before and after HFS, respectively. Many peaks are abolished or attenuated after HFS. The dashed blue lines indicate position of major sulci shown in part A (red trace). 
Discussion 
In order to selectively activate targeted structures within the spinal cord it is necessary to deliver supra-threshold levels of electrical stimuli to the targeted sub-region of the spinal cord while at the same time exposing nearby non-targeted structures to only sub-threshold levels. For example, when targeting axons within the laterally positioned low back somatotopic region of the dorsal columns to achieve pain relief, activation of the immediately adjacent 

========8========

2010 
O Flouty et al 
(A) (B) 
(C) 
Figure 4. (A) Experimental setup showing the bipolar neurostimulator placed over the dorsal surface of the sheep’s spinal cord (upper ﬁgure). Monophasic constant voltage stimulation was performed with the dura intact and post-durotomy. The lower ﬁgure shows the shape and conﬁguration of the bipolar leads that delivered the electrical pulses. Contact diameter is 1 mm and inter-contact distance is 2 mm (cathode was rostral). (B) Average evoked potentials (upper two graphs) at 1 volt (left) and 5 volts (right) following spinal cord stimulation (SCS) using the setup described in A). Red and blue traces represent intra- and epidural stimulation respectively. The thickness of the line represents the 95% conﬁdence interval (1.97 × SEM). The lower two graphs represent the time-varying high-gamma-band envelope. (C) post-mortem brain of the sheep showing the contact location situated just posterior to the anterio-most bank of the supra-sylvian sulcus. Asterisks show an area of brain disruption which is an artifact that occurred during extraction of the brain. 
dorsal rootlets must be avoided, as rootlet activation is associated with aversive sensations and uncomfortable reﬂex activity. The inability to achieve these conditions is thought to be an important contributing factor to poor outcomes in many patients, and this theory is supported by the results of ﬁnite element computational models that objectively quantify the spatial distribution of extradurally driven current densities inside and around the spinal canal (Holsheimer 2002, Struijk et al 1991). As shown in such studies, there is a steep gradient of stimulation effects on or within neural tissue as a function of distance from a stimulating electrode on or within neural tissue, and it is becoming clear that >95% of all the potentially targetable ﬁbers cannot be activated within the therapeutic window available to standard epidural stimulators. 
One of the reasons for this situation is that in humans the dorsal spinal cord surface and overlying dura are separated by a layer of CSF that has a conductivity ∼20× larger than that found transversely in the SC white matter. In the thoracic spine the CSF layer can be up to 

========9========

New device for pathway modulation 2011 
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 5.Comparison between two periods before and after 15 min of continuous SCS separated by 
4.5 h. Multi-taper short-time Fourier transform was used to derive the time-frequency plots of each 
channel for the period corresponding to 200 ms before and 400 ms after TNS. Each plot represents 
a single channel. The x-axis represents time from −200 to 400 ms in relation to stimulation time 
0s.They-axis represents frequencies from 0 to 250 Hz, and color represents the power in decibels (range −10 to 10 dB). The period before continuous SCS is shown in (A), while the period after 
continuous SCS is shown in (B). It is visually evident that cortical activation in response to TNS 
was depressed in some contacts following 15 min of a continuous train of SCS. The dashed lines 
show the locations of the suprasylvian and sylvian sulci relative to the contact locations on the grid 
from which the respective waveforms were recorded. 
10 mm thick (Lee et al 2010). As a result, the source currents of up to 5–8 mA in amplitude (Schade et al 2010) delivered through extradural electrodes, which can have surface areas as large as ∼10 mm2, are attenuated within the low-resistivity CSF (ρ = 60  cm) and are spatially diffused. It can thus be difﬁcult for epidural stimulators to selectively activate targeted neural pathways within particular dermatome layers (which might be ∼400 μm × 2mmin 

========10========

2012 
O Flouty et al 
Figure 6. Representative photomicrograph of the sheep spinal cord that was in direct contact with the I-Patch. H&E, scale bar = 1 mm. The box contains the magniﬁed image shown in the inset, highlighting the pial blood vessels on the dorsal surface of the spinal cord (scale bar = 100 μm). 
cross-sectional size) without stimulating nearby non-targeted structures. Shunting of the current by the CSF also leads to power inefﬁciencies since the dissipation levels can vary from 1 to 45 mW for presently used stimulators, which typically operate at frequencies of 20–100 Hz, pulse widths on the order of 100 μs, and corresponding low-end duty cycles of 0.2%. As noted above, in patients with pain localizing to the low back, these are particularly signiﬁcant limitations because the axons processing sensory information from the low back are thought to be somatotopically positioned immediately adjacent to the dorsal root entry zone (Davidoff 1989, Feirabend et al 2002, Smith and Deacon 1984). 
The I-Patch system seeks to overcome these difﬁculties by positioning small electrodes directly on the targeted sub-regions of the spinal cord. Direct SCS strategies exploit the steep gradient effects, exposing targeted tissue to the supra-threshold levels of stimulation, while nearby non-targeted tissues fall within regions of the gradient that are below the activation threshold. In contrast, considerable distances and intervening layers of tissues and ﬂuids separate stimuli delivered to the epidural space from both targeted and non-targeted spinal cord structures. In that setting, the targeted and non-targeted spinal cord regions are in closer proximity to each other than either region is to the stimulating electrode, thus making it impossible to create sharp stimulation effect gradients between the two regions. The results of our in vivo experiments are consistent with models predicting steep declines in stimulation effect thresholds as a function of distance from the stimulating electrode, as well as the effects of intervening tissue (e.g., dura mater) positioned between the stimulating electrode and spinal cord. While our ﬁndings provide initial support for the improved stimulation scenario described above, they are nevertheless limited in scope and much additional work will be needed in order to establish the potential advantages of the direct intradural approach. We have taken some steps in that direction via our ongoing investigations of epidural versus intradural protocols (Flouty et al). However, evaluations of SSEP responses arising from other peripheral nerve 

========11========

New device for pathway modulation 2013 
locations, as well as controlled testing of the effects caused by varying the stimulus signal parameters in the appropriate acute and chronic in vivo models, will also be needed. 
The acute, in vivo ovine experiments described here also demonstrated the technical workability of securing a highly malleable I-Patch implant directly to the spinal cord and electrically activating the somatosensory system without causing tissue injury. In the acute intra-operative setting, it was feasible to gently drape the I-Patch device over the dorsal surface of the cord and achieve direct mechanical coupling between the electrode contacts and the pial surface. The results demonstrate the utility and mechanical safety of the lateral ﬁxation technique that was employed. Large amplitude somatosensory evoked potentials in response to I-Patch electrical stimulation were consistently obtained at stimulation strengths that are well below the threshold for creating stimulation-induced neural injury (McCreery et al 2004). I-Patch electrical stimulation of the dorsal columns also produced long-lasting changes in the patterns of somatosensory evoked responses to subsequent TNS. Because of safety considerations and various technical barriers to human experimentation, there are no comparable data published examining the effects of SCS on brain electrophysiological responses to somatosensory system activation in patients, thus adding to the uniqueness of the large animal model results presented here. Histological analysis of explanted spinal cord tissue showed no evidence of surface blood vessel thrombosis or tissue injury resulting from securing the malleable I-Patch onto the spinal cord surface. Although these preliminary electrophysiological studies were designed to facilitate medical device development, the robust and complex nature of the brain responses observed using an intracranial recording method highlight opportunities for future basic neuroscience investigations examining the inﬂuence of ascending spinal cord pathway signals on cortical signal processing. 
Current technical limitations of this wired version of the I-Patch include CSF leak and tethering of the spinal cord. In order to reduce these risks, the clinical I-Patch system will include device design features that make use of FDA approved dural substitute materials to enable the surgeon to achieve a water-tight seal of the dura at the completion of the implantation procedure. A completely alternative approach to avoiding such complications would be to incorporate a wireless receiver into the implant, as discussed above. 
Conclusions 
The results of these acute experiments demonstrate that the very soft, ﬂexible I-Patch electrode array can be safely attached to the spinal cord surface using a lateral ﬁxation technique and effectively activate somatosensory spinal cord pathways. Our experimental protocol also demonstrated the ability of this approach to modulate the SSEPs produced by TNS, up to 4.5 h post-excitation. We have also shown that intradural stimulation requires a lower voltage to activate speciﬁc targets in the spinal cord when compared to epidural stimulation. This ﬁnding can prove to be very important given its implication on the therapeutic window and battery life. Therefore, a separate study should be made to further quantify the differences between epidural and intradural stimulation. Future experiments will examine the safety and efﬁcacy of chronically implanted I-Patch devices in behaving animals, using quadruped gait-analysis techniques and other appropriate measures of performance. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank our University of Iowa colleagues D Fredericks, B D Dalm, N S Dahdaleh and Haiming Chen for assistance with the experimental arrangements and for several useful 

========12========

2014 
O Flouty et al 
discussions. The prototype I-Patch devices were made by Evergreen Medical Technologies, LLC, and we thank R Shurig, S E Scott and R S Nelson for their careful device assembly efforts and pre-deployment performance checks. The work was funded in part by the University of Iowa GIVF Seed Funds Program, the University of Virginia Biomedical Innovation Fund, and the Kopf Family Foundation, Inc. 
References 
Atkinson L, Sundaraj S R, Brooker C, O’Callaghan J, Teddy P, Salmon J, Semple T and Majedi P M 2011 
Recommendations for patient selection in spinal cord stimulation J. Clin. Neurosci. 18 1295–302 
Davidoff R A 1989 The dorsal columns Neurology 39 1377–85 
Dolan S and Nolan A M 2002 Behavioral evidence supporting a differential role for spinal group I and II metabotropic 
glutamate receptors in inﬂammatory hyperalgesia in sheep Neuropharmacology 43 319–26 
Eldabe S, Kumar K, Buchser E and Taylor R S 2010 An analysis of the components of pain, function, and health- 
related quality of life in patients with failed back surgery syndrome treated with spinal cord stimulation or 
conventional medical management Neuromodulation 13 201–9 
Feirabend H K, Choufoer H, Ploeger S, Holsheimer J and van Gool J D 2002 Morphometry of human superﬁcial 
dorsal and dorsolateral column ﬁbres: signiﬁcance to spinal cord stimulation Brain 125 1137–49 
Flo A S, Moe R O, Janczak A M, Skjerve E, Valle P S and Zanella A J 2009 Exploring non-invasive methods to assess 
pain in sheep Physiol. Behav. 98 640–8 
Flouty O E, Oya H, Kawasaki H, Reddy C G, Fredericks D C, Gibson-Corley K N, Jeffery N D, Gillies G T 
and Howard M A III Intracranial somatosensory responses with direct spinal cord stimulation in anesthetized 
sheep J. Neural Eng. submitted 
Ghazi S R and Gholami S 1993a A study of the length of the spinal cord in pre- and postnatal life in Mehraban sheep 
(Ovis aries) Vet. Res. Commun. 17 417–20 
Ghazi S R and Gholami S 1993b Changes in the termination of spinal-cord at vertebral levels during prenatal and 
postnatal-development of sheep J. Appl. Anim. Res. 4 61–66 
Gibson-Corley K N, Oya H, Flouty O, Fredericks D C, Jeffery N D, Gillies G T and Howard M A III An experimental 
animal model for testing a novel spinal cord stimulator dentate ligament ﬁxation method J. Invest. Surg. at press Herrero J F and Headley P M 1995a Sensitization of spinal neurons by non-noxious stimuli in the awake but not 
anesthetized state Anesthesiology 82 267–75 
Herrero J F and Headley P M 1995b The dominant class of somatosensory neuron recorded in the spinal dorsal horn 
of awake sheep Pain 61 133–38 
Herrero J F and Headley P M 1995c Cutaneous responsiveness of lumbar spinal neurons in awake and halothane- 
anesthetized sheep J. Neurophysiol. 74 1549–62 
Holsheimer J 2002 Which neuronal elements are activated directly by spinal cord stimulation 
Neuromodulation 5 25–31 
Holsheimer J and Wesselink W A 1997 Optimum electrode geometry for spinal cord stimulation: the narrow bipole 
and tripole Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 35 493–7 
Howard M A III, Utz M, Brennan T J, Dalm B D, Viljoen S, Jeffery N D and Gillies G T 2011a 
Intradural approach to selective stimulation in the spinal cord for treatment of intractable pain 
J. Appl. Phys. 110 044702 
Howard M A III, Utz M, Brennan T J, Dalm B D, Viljoen S, Kanwal J K and Gillies G T 2011b Biophysical 
attributes of an in vitro spinal cord surrogate for use in developing an intradural neuromodulation system 
J. Appl. Phys. 110 074701 
Hsu C-H, Tseng S-B, Hsieh Y-J and Wang C-C 2011 One-time-implantable spinal cord simulation system prototype 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst. 5 490–8 
Johnson J I, Rubel E W and Hatton G I 1974 Mechanosensory projections to cerebral-cortex of Sheep J. Comp. 
Neurol. 158 81–107 
Kumar K and Bishop S 2009 Financial impact of spinal cord stimulation on the healthcare budget: a comparative 
analysis of costs in Canada and the United States clinical article J. Neurosurg. Spine 10 564–73 
Kumar K et al 2007 Spinal cord stimulation versus conventional medical management for neuropathic pain: a 
multicentre randomised controlled trial in patients with failed back surgery syndrome Pain 132 179–88 Lee R A, van Zundert A A J, Botha C P, Lataster L M A, van Zundert T C R V, van der Ham W G J M 
and Wieringa P A 2010 The anatomy of the thoracic spinal canal in different postures—a magnetic resonance 
imaging investigation Reg. Anesth. Pain Med. 35 364–9 

========13========

New device for pathway modulation 2015 
Linderoth B and Meyerson B A 2010 Spinal cord stimulation exploration of the physiological basis of a widely used 
therapy Anesthesiology 113 1265–7 
Mandal S and Sarpeshkar R 2008 Power-efﬁcient impedance-modulation wireless data links for biomedical implants 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst. 2 301–15 
McCreery D, Pikov V, Lossinsky A, Bullara L and Agnew W 2004 Arrays for chronic functional microstimulation 
of the lumbosacral spinal cord IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12 195–207 
Melzack R and Wall P D 1965 Pain mechanisms—a new theory Science 150 971–9 
North R B 2008 Neural interface devices: spinal cord stimulation technology Proc. IEEE 96 1108–19 
North R B, Kidd D, Shipley L and Taylor R S 2007 Spinal cord stimulation versus reoperation for failed back 
surgery syndrome: a cost effectiveness and cost utility analysis based on a randomized, controlled trial 
Neurosurgery 61 361–8 
Oakley J C and Prager J P 2002 Spinal cord stimulation: mechanisms of action Spine 27 2574–83 
Oya H, Reddy C G, Dahdaleh N, Wilson S, Howard MA III, Jeffery N D, Utz M and Gillies G T 2012 Applier tool 
for intradural spinal cord implants J. Med. Eng. Tech. 36 169–73 
Rose J E 1942 A cytoarchitectural study of the sheep cortex J. Comp. Neurol. 76 1–55 
Schade C M, Sasaki J, Schultz D M, Tamayo N, King G and Johanek L M 2010 Assessment of patient preference for 
constant voltage and constant current spinal cord stimulation Neuromodulation 13 210–7 
Sharma V, McCreery D B, Han M and Pikov V 2010 Bidirectional telemetry controller for neuroprosthetic devices 
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18 67–74 
Shealy C N, Mortimer J T and Hagfors N R 1970 Dorsal column electroanalgesia J. Neurosurg. 32 560–4 Shealy C N, Mortimer J T and Reswick J B 1967 Electrical inhibition of pain by stimulation of dorsal columns— 
preliminary clinical report Anesth. Analg. Curr. Res. 46 489–91 
Smith M C and Deacon P 1984 Topographical anatomy of the posterior columns of the spinal-cord in man—the long 
ascending ﬁbers Brain 107 671–98 
Song S-H, Gillies G T, Howard M A III, Kuhnley B and Utz M 2012 Power and signal transmission 
protocol for a contactless subdural spinal cord stimulation device Biomed. Microdevices (at press) 
doi:10.1007/s10544-012-9684-1 
Struijk J J, Holsheimer J, Vanveen B K and Boom H B K 1991 Epidural spinal-cord stimulation—calculation of ﬁeld 
potentials with special reference to dorsal column nerve-ﬁbers IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 38 104–10 Taylor R S, Van Buyten J P and Buchser E 2005 Spinal cord stimulation for chronic back and leg pain and failed back 
surgery syndrome: a systematic review and analysis of prognostic factors Spine 30 152–60 
Vialle R, Loureiro M C, Ilharreborde B, Liu S, Lozeron P and Tadie M 2006 The feasibility of detecting motor and 
sensory potentials in a sheep model Lab. Anim. 40 469–73 
Wilson R D and Beerwinkle K R 1986 Somatosensory-evoked potential induced by stimulation of the caudal tibial 
nerve in awake and barbiturate-anesthetized sheep Am. J. Vet. Res. 47 46–49 
Wilson S, Howard M A, Rossen J D, Brennan T J, Dalm B D, Dahdaleh N S, Utz M and Gillies G T 2012 Pulsatile 
spinal cord surrogate for intradural neuromodulation studies J. Med. Eng. Technol. 36 22–5 

========14========

