s Page. 
 1. 
standard rate of 10%. 
com, Inc. 
re not getting a date this Friday night. 
Vishal joined our group in October. 
Let me know when you get the quotes from Pauline. 
growth, and temperature. 
Just wanted to give you an update. 
 Hope this info helps. 
report prepared before the original purchase? 
What I am looking for is a little design help in the kitchen. 
I just refaxed. 
 Are there any operational besides ICE and Dynegy? 
of $241,000. 
time. 
property. 
III. 
s weather turned warmer. 
com. 
 I have forwarded your request to Zarin Imam at EES. 
George W. 
There will be a meeting on Tuesday, Oct. 
Phasing works as follows. 
preliminary proforma to be on the safe side. 
Here is a short letter that indicates I will give consent contingent to the items we discussed. 
Improving the PRC process. 
 Has their attorney contacted you with any revisions? 
true launch and the completed integration with EnronOnline. 
com. 
Here is my first pass at midyear reviews. 
3. 
4. 
The planned mountain bike activity is on Beaver Creek Mountain. 
 be seen prior to dinner on Friday night at Saddleridge. 
 Monday would be better. 
	Key World Trade Center losses affect insurance, metals trading, major financial houses. 
 I know that Sue Mara spoke with Ron on this subject also, although I was not on the call. 
 There is still a substantial amount of value above variable costs on the books. 
The target for end of October is 1283. 
2. 
Pronschinske. 
 The website is below. 
Sheri A. 
One question that it would be good if you think about it before we meet is as follow. 
I cannot download his resume. 
per sq. 
This sounds better than the limitations you were describing in the meeting. 
31, 2002, you will have another $750,000. 
     your municipals credited  towards marginable securities. 
     I would like to achieve a yield of 5%. 
 same issue. 
 I would recommend bringing Emil to Houston for further interviews based on his technical knowledge. 
1. 
In the course of an afternoon ... 
about a point you made. 
This is a test from Yahoo email. 
again. 
you shaped the forward vol and price curves at each level. 
 No firm plans, just getting out of Dallas. 
I have tentative plans to be in Houston on Thursday, October  19.? 
m actually trying to go through all my email from the week. 
match tutors with students in subject areas. 
Offset Minimum - The minimum Offset allowed for both Buys and Sells. 
t wait for football... 
1) Are you expecting an increase in headcount? 
plan for? 
Thanks. 
opinions expressed herein are solely those of the author. 
        issues of $30 million pretax, or $20 million aftertax. 
On Friday I emailed a new vol curve to use for VAR testing. 
My cab, that we called at 6:10, showed up at 7:02. 
nevermind. 
$1? 
but are unsure how high a price to offer. 
just got back to my desk after being in meetings all day. 
(3). 
I think the location i talked about before is actually better for you. 
mass mailings)? 