haha
mm
meiguo de mei wo xihuan
i like shui as well
ni ne?
oh really ugh
oh wo ye yiyang
will you call my phone? i think it's under my bed but i'm not sure where exactly
oh really shit
oh crap i might have left it in my parents' room
oops..................
that was how i fell asleep last night
by crawling into my parents' bed
lul nope they were
no like 2
yes....
hahahaha no
it's not that weird!!
some people like to show affection towards their parents
um my mom asks me literally every day to cuddle with her
*snuggle
gosh sorry you feel so uncomfortable showing affection
hahahaha
i would do that more often but a lot of the time my mom comes and wakes me up in the morning
m yeah that didn't make sense
sorry didn't realize you and your mom were comfortable displaying your nude bodies to each other
do you go to the nude beach together too?
ha
ha
ha
Phoebe HuangMonday, August 12, 2013 at 10:50am CDT
Ella KesaievaMonday, August 12, 2013 at 11:06am CDT
hahahahahahahaha
HAHAHA
wrong arm though
will i can just imagine you saying all these things so perfectly
"camo hats"
^i'll remember that for next lawn parties
i won't be here :( i'll wear it in spirit
......
tyler, you are stunning <3
hey wong laoshi said it first
and wow you're one to talk phoebe
if anyone would like to see our conversation last night just let me know
ella: http://imgur.com/a/i0Wt7
feel better william
im participating in this https://www.facebook.com/events/770753559608232/?ref_newsfeed_story_type=regular
AND I'M GOING TO CRUSH YOU ALL
WILL what's her name
this actually fairly accurately describes my cousin's summer abroad experience
tyler why were you on betches love this
Matthew GinsbergWednesday, December 4, 2013 at 6:41pm CST
609-577-0749!
sunday should work for me as well!
ooooh no i have tutoring around 12:45 :(
all right just text me
Aoi SenjuThursday, October 3, 2013 at 10:13pm CDT
Hannah HirshMonday, September 9, 2013 at 3:38pm CDT
hey so i was talking to weiming and he said his bus tickets would be about $70 round trip. he also mentioned his travel time was going to be really long because he has to go first to NYC and then down to princeton. i feel kind of bad that he'd be spending all that money to come see us so i was thinking maybe we could all just chip in $10 and cover it for him? i think he's paying for his own wristband. although henrique if you're buying him drinks then i wouldn't expect you to chip in for the bus tickets too. what do you guys think?
Liz OstertagThursday, June 13, 2013 at 8:25am CDT
whooo frands
Hannah HirshTuesday, March 26, 2013 at 2:16pm CDT
hey!! people doing PiB we should book flights together ASAP I think my mom wants to book us on a non-stop from either philly or newark. also, would you guys be interested in traveling around china a bit afterwards? my mom is reaallly against the idea but i'm hoping to change her mind. p.s. feel free to add anyone else from the area who's going!
keshi shang le PiB yihou, nide zhongwen hui geng hao!
dui, so you should travel with us afterwards!
hahahahahahaha
ok
DAWAY YOU CAN'T ESCAPE. FACEBOOK TELLS ME YOU'VE SEEN THIS MESSAGE YOU SHOULD ANSWER IT
you. are. a. pain in the butt.
but this is afterwards, right? so we could book flights for going there
wo mama shuo: "There is basically only one United non-stop flight from Newark to PEK that leaves June 20 and arrives June 21." i can ask her to forward the flight information
is there a way we can book together so we can get seats next to each other?
i think so.
omg daway don't you want to be stuck on a plane with me for 14 hours?!?!?!?
:D
¯\(°_o)/¯
yeahhh that's true - if we arrive earlier than that, do we have a place to stay?
ZHE DAOSHI GE HAO ZHUYI
mingtian hui wen laoshi!!!11
(daway, bie eang wo wangle!!)
*rang whoops wode bad
meiguo = beautiful country
HAHAHA WOW SO FUNNY DAWAY YOU JERK
-_-
hahahaha ok I'll check with my mom
i'm ignoring daway for now
jk yeah but i was thinking longer-- like 2 weeks? or maybe 1 and a half?
wooooooahh :o that'd be cool
TING QI LAI HEN YOU YISI!!!!
travel!
oh wait that costs money
still, seeing more of china would be cool
shanghai and hongkong
yes, let's!
i'm down -- how late?
do you mean actual late meal, or just dinner on the late side? if it's the latter, i say 7
quote from the handbook: "All students should arrive by Friday, June 21. The entire day has been set aside for receiving students—there are no other activities planned. Arriving on the 21st will allow you to change money and rest up for the placement exam that starts at 8:00am on the 22nd. Do not arrive after the 21st." I think arriving on the 21st should be fine.
"placement exam" oh boy
ok ehmmm let's postpone this meeting actually if that's ok with everyone! also my mom doesn't want us to do china airlines because she thinks they're bu anquan :/
I DUNNO HFMDLKFMKDMGKLM tai duo gongzuo rang wo bu gaoxing :(
