But I mean I can see him being pissed.
Cause didn't the Dan denise thing start earlier b4 they broke up.
Like what?
How did mike find out?
He went to the bday pt.
Hmm yeah I'd be pissed if I was mike. This sounds way worse than the Bowen Dan fiasco.
Over Jim.
Jin.
Lol u just liked his fashion u fagtard.
I won't cuse Alex and Denise are close.
U liked one outwardly thing about him and as u said you didn't know him well.
How are u gonna get wine?
Dont mention it's for jel lol.
Say for a girl and it's a secret.
Who it is.
Lol sight u shud txt him early tomorrow tho.
Yeah I mean u gotta be straight up at that pt and be like yo cn I fuck ur ex.
And if mike says no then drop it.
We?
Wtf.
So he pretty much said yeah I'm making a move in her but Brandon is ok with it so w/e.
No I think u shud tell cwu to stop it. I don't think u shud bring it up to Brandon.
...
Lolol they re all realizing how stupid hs relationships are and it's lulLZy to the max.
Like all of them I think realize it that were ant-Abe.
Snr-snr.
Auto correct lol.
I meant senior-senior.
Lol u shud I'm jul ANd tell her about ur literature analysis.
Lol u shud go for the low blow with Brian and be like.
Sorry dude but ur gonna be friendliness forever fagtard.
Friend zoned *.
keep playing vid games.
I'm sure that ll get u girls.
I mean u can get like patricia Zhou and Lauren kong but that's it lol.
Damn I'm actually mad at him now.
After that response.
God what a loser.
Next time I see Christina...
Imma tell her that Brian definitely wants on.
And she's friend zoned him.
And it's hilarious but still she shud cut it off.
Cause the friend zoning prob makes him cry every night b4 bed.
And also that I t hink Brian is being a nigger doing this while cwu is dating Brandon.
Who cares I'll make her feel guilty so those feelings nvr arise.
Lol honestly so true.
Nxt time u hear they have a date tell me and then I'll im cwu about it if u don't wanna.
Well thing is Brandon is naive so he doesn't suspect byeh wants more.
Brian told mike that he told cwu?
And mike better be extra against this cuz of the whiole Dan thing.
Oh.
No that'll mke him feel bad.
Yeah at least tell cwu first.
Wtf man.
These amoral assholes really get to me.
No cuz if u do u have to include the fact that u think byeh is making a move and they aren't just hanging out.
I guess u can if u want.
But we should meet up at some point tomorrow and go on a tirade against cwu.
Can u ask like to send u the chat logs?
Mike *.
Give me entire quote of the convi.
Tell Nike to send it to u.
Why..
Or just tell him to copy paste it all if he doesn't mind.
Ty.
Ask Oscar pls?
if it isn't too much.
I just do.
I wanna see it for myself.
Aight w.e If u can't get it w/e.
Would it be too much To tell cwu about the convi quotes.
He's a butghurt friendzoned fagtard is what he is.
Well tbh she's gonna be like we re just friends so it's ok.
And there's really no reply o that unless u say that byeh wants to be more than friends u think.
hmm alright imma be arab the hs earlier in the day so maybe I pick u up and we talk to cwu together.
I gotta see Caitlin too I think so I'll bring it up to her too.
If I see her.
In person is always better for this shit.
Fuck I wanna wreck cwu's life I really do.
Alex is rubbing of on me.
Cwu called u an asshole.
U gotta set that shit straight.
Lululul.
I wanna quote that:
No it's a great quote.
I didn't mean it negative lol.
Idk Zach is annoying I don't talk to him.
I see him tomorrow tho I'll ask him if u want.
Ah Daway pretending that he's uninterested.
Lil.
Lil.
Lul.
Ofc.
As u said.
Idgaf about anything.
WHAT a cool kid ;).
Lul. Aight bed soon I guess.
Ttyl.
haha.
brilliant.
