did u invite Caitlin/ get the ok from jel.
haha nah dude he knows of Caitlin's horridness but doesnt wanna admit it.
did u see Murray fed?
ah yeah I'm in Geneva ATM and the family we are with raged lol.
no and btw I got my wallet stolen so bye bye 140$ +liscense+ college id lol.
idk too lazy and too late now.
and it's expensive.
hiding 75 isn't easy from parents.
but u need a house to deliver to and u need to sure he money.
lolol Caitlin just im'd me but I don't wanna click on it and have her see "seen".
cause she starts " I don't know if u can see this or not but...".
I'll just not look lol.
dude she and Ganesh always like things that I don't like about me on fb lol.
like ur post on my wall.
in general she does or he does, pics wall posts, etc.
?
aw.
what was it.
ur lab report?
my question was what was in your lab report? like what was it about?
oh lol.
I see and it's not cause you need to I think in formal scientific work right?
lots of methodology.
are you guys on the same old project of making crystals? I didn't know you were doing things that had u analyze experimental data or something.
I see and that wasn't something obvious to kr.
me*.
cause I'm pretty sure the common conception is even as undergrad research internships most of the stuff is gruntish work.
hahahaha.
lol that's lulZy to the max.
I don't even think u get hungover much at our age lol.
hahaha lol I can't wait till he goes to cmu and parties it up.
dem chicks there are hot as.
Navid AshariSunday, August 5, 2012 at 2:38pm CDT.
Navid AshariSunday, August 5, 2012 at 2:38pm CDT.
that last im.
i lul'd so hard.
he never got past 2nd right? no dick action.
he told me he got some ass each.
yeah I guess he needs the boobs.
its funny when I told him I knew about it he asked from who and I said Alex and he was like Alex knows? I guess the girls know too.
like the girls from our school Carr.
care*.
and yeah I did and she keeps icing me.
I already sent u the first part second part: "..but I'm sorry for raping you even after u tryied to run away and I kept clinging to u when u ran around. please come back I promise not to rape u as long as you hold down Daway for me do I can blow him while he crys.
she seems to like the tears too.
I think just the girl.
im not sure why crying would make u get off faster lol.
only if they were tears of happiness he sheds which fall on the girls face making it seem like she's crying too which would make him even happier and cry harder so it would go o her face faster.
in an everlasting feedback loop.
bday.
bdsm.
you in ny?
oh so tell me how was the sleepover, still hate em all?
and how's Oscar been.
is he gonna break with Shannon u think?
have u made him hate ur friends yet?
sar Internet died.
but lul fags.
but how can love her if she treats him bad in addition to the sex.
like the bday thing.
like I get the no sex not caine kinda, but I don't et the general bad gf thing.
did u confront byeh about his mom.
talking to ur mom?
u shud hve.
whatdud they say.
Bout cwu.
oh did u guys talk about t to byeh.
or has that been dropped.
Lol u do give too little fucks.
jul and jel sex.
and of course iming me.
must be the highlight I ur day.
I know.
I've been fap deprived.
u shud compile a list of bestof s of the last two weeks.
and gift them to mr when I come back.
I hadnt been doing it much b4 I came.
like every other/ every 3 days.
maybe even less.
so do u think jul has caught on by now.
that u like her?
and u the same?
Using that fag way u talk to girls?
with ur smilies and explanation points?
I srsly hate it man.
I really do.
I mean I admit I talk to girls a little differ y but not like u.
oh.
that's sight then.
alright.
yeah that's the Asian way.
which btw there's so many fucking fobs.
in Paris.
holy shy.
I hate em.
ya.
lololol.
he is either gonna give in.
or be like you.
and instead of it brig that fag Daway hates the Asians / his fiends.
