why no tlet me take you to hair cut - it's just in and out very quick.
she is real good.
fast.
but excel skill.
why not?
DoDo how are you.
then tell me what's going on in your life.
what did you learn.
and how are the teachers and classes.
i am not asking a lot.
but you need to tell your mom what's happening over there.
computer science, - don't just limit yourself on what's in the classroom.
i am going out to take a walk now.
Hey DoDo - did you get my txt?
she runs to our house, then back - as a routine, and even more routes in the woods.
isn't it amazing.
did you get CS 217?
My Dear DoDo, how are you?
Daway you need to seek challenges in computer science, not in film. Film and liberal art are easy. I can do it. Anyone who can express themselves can enjoy it. It's for enjoyment. You need to be good at computer science. So good that it can become a powerful tool.
Chk audio. Send me list of ur courses. I need u to be serious in becoming good at cs. I can stand in front of ur dorm for whole day.
Did u listen to some of the talk in WeChat?
Expand your involvement in computer sciences. Don't be too greedy .
Don't be greedy at film or experience. Be ambitious on your field. In computer science. Learn more there.
Also chk internship.
How r u? Dodo.
Did u read the novel prose winners?
Did u listen to Sundays audio?
Dodo.
i cannot say enough about you need to broaden your involvement in CS.
can you talk for 10 min now.
When?
Daway, have you started looking for internship?
DoDo.
didn't you say you will send me the list.
DoDo.
be agreesive at Computer Science, not others. Also, check and sign up for emails on internships!!!!
Good night.
DoDo.
How are you?
need help on chinese?
how come you don't ask help on chinese these days?
ok, please pay attention to internship, and really push yourself on excellency on Computer Science.
Daway, can you put in attention to learning, not film - film is art, that you have life time to enjoy.
Daway.
healthy?
your school is sending email to us.
ok. i want you to know, don't repeat my mistake. film - you have life time to enjoy, but the tools, the CS, you need to focus, that's your priority.
will you have dinner with me and help me with chinderlier?
ok.
DoDo.
i went to PPPL today, and I am glad you didn't go to their internship.
you know, their input/output rate is only 4-1, the goal is 1-10.
so now the energy in, only 25% out.
if 1-1, it's even; the goal is 1-10, but reality is 4-1.
they think maybe 2020 or 2030.
anyway, they did need a lot of C/C++ programmers for internship.
because they write their own control software.
generate fushion.
energy.
right now the electricity.
it's so behind.
they need to use a lot of electricity to run experiement just for 1 second.
i am so glad you didn't go to physics.
anyway, send me your resume.
who is this sanchez?
he striked out red sox 12 players already.
is your resume template from princeton?
do you have to use table?
i cannot add /modify it.
you want to add a section "ACHIEVEMENTS and AWARDS".
also, you want to change "Programming lanauage" as "Skill", then Programming lanauage as a sub-bullet.
then, add another bullet like data modelling.
then another one like computer hardware.
then another bullet like Microsoft office package, excel,...
Can you see if Princeton Career center website has a sample template for you to download.
send me your updated version.
really find the template/sample from the career website.
you should also change it to "Experience and Activity".
or add a separate catagory "Activity".
then under Acitivity, add club tennis, writing for magazine, study aborad, couch surfing tour.
remember, resume is to help people to know you.
where are you, DoDo.
you ok?
you recovered?
took a hot shower?
Daway.
can you talk.
why not.
Daway, you really "Really" need to put in effort on learning CS programming language, then you need to go to those campus visits from tech company.
did you take a look of the resume - just update it and send back to me.
then we should work on cover letter.
then you can at least start sending them in.
you see one of the posting about Amazon's interview at Sept 2013.
asking data structure and alg questions.
binary tree etc.
it starts at campus.
campus - will be just talk.
then phone interview.
but you need to go during campus visit.
Daway how to enable iPhone to show where u am and post it on Facebook?
