Di, Jennifer, Sharon,... they are coming over for dinner this Sat - do you have time to join us?
why.
it's ok.
but you work hard, and on those cover letters, iok.
how is your work? CS project?
what is the project about?
wow.
building a compiler for assembly?
i learned assembly and i learned it very well.
assembly is very stupid.
so you have to think like it.
step by step.
and you need to be careful about the loop in assembly.
watch for details.
and the boundary conditions.
any other interesting projects you did at courses, that you can put them in cover letters too.
dodo.
be careful.
the maningitics.
stay away from sick people.
wash your hands , don't share food, drinks.
love you!
DoDo.
how are you.
i am quite concerned on the meningitics thing at princeton.
promise me, you will watch your health, stay away from sick people, and if you don't feel well, go to health center right away.
ok. i love you.
DoDo.
did yo uread my email.
k.
do you need help on your cos project?
is this still the assembly proj?
Do the internship this Friday then!
and we mailed out all the appl;ication this Sunday, ok.
don't delay till Thanksgiving.
able to stay focus and finish project?
DoDo, did you fnsh your project?
can i call you ?
what is the assembly project about?
dropbox's internship will need you to study/research a bit.
DoDo.
how are you?
tomorrow we have dinner at 6:45.
i will pick you up at 6:30.
did you read all my emails.
check the face recogniztion link in my email.
it's very interesting.
Location: Frist Multi-purpose Room Overview: We invite undergraduate students to attend the second All-Princeton Resource Fair for Summer Internships & Funding! Friday, December 6, 2013 from 1-4pm Frist Lower Level Multi-purpose Room Full Description: Interested in a summer internship? Learn about the multiple resources on campus available to undergraduate students across all concentrations and industries for summer internships! We invite students in the classes of 2015, 2016, and 2017 to come to Frist on December 6th and meet campus representatives to discuss funding options, internship programs, and summer internships through university departments for summer 2014! Come to this "one stop" fair to learn about a variety of Princeton resources for summer internships and funding! Attire is business casual.
https://princeton.experience.com/stu/cf_details?fhnd=6465.
add to your calendar.
DoDo.
you should not tell your mom to shot up.
that's very rude.
be kind to your mom.
??????? is the most serious one: because it's something every senior to face. they no longer have income, so if they didn't manage their money well, they will not have money to doctors, to enjoy, this will cause their ????
do you want me to call you?
i am back.
i can help more.
the econmy problem can cause more problems for old people.
you know Jason also wants to major in CS in particular machine learning.
so he will take probablity, statistic etc.
you should too.
anything else i can help?
k.
Did you ever do a "uname -a" on your server?
can you just do it.
it's only one command.
k.
work hard.
DoDo.
done with your CS proj?
when is it due?
are you in good shape in handling it?
need help?
anyway, i am heading home now. Focus. Love.
what is this project about?
My Dear DoDo.
gather enough momentum and finish your applications, ok.
tomorrow the IIP has a session.
How are you, DoDo? Anything I can help?
k. focus!
good night.
dropbox - do the one with face recognition - it involves math .
did you get my email on the analysis on all the dropbox projects?
what is the new profile pic?
DoDo.
did you apply the dropbox?
and linkedIn?
check my excel, there are more.
you know if you did internship last year, you will pick differnece courses and be more aware. so take other's advice, and talk to career center.
i want to help.
My Dear DoDo.
finished your linkedin and dropbox.
waiting or delaying don't give you any benefit.
hey, did you see the picture i sent you?
and use my excel, update it and send back.
and use your network, PROMYS one, and your TAs.
How was the formal?
any pictures to share?
submit your applications to linkedin and dropbox.
