Ty. I am coming home now. Did y look up the campus visits from those top tech companies? This is more important than film or English. Ok because the time is limited.
how are you, Dodo?
Study hard. Whole heartily. Ok.
I want you to really focus on cs.
Chicago is good. Good trip.
Making good lead for new pros.
Did u check campus visits?
U need to pay attention to that. Or send me urls to let me chk for u.
Any Chinese or cs I can help? I can even discuss ur film or English w u.
DoDo, working hard?
ok. work smart, work hard. love you!
DoDo.
how are you?
Need help?
work hard and study , ok.
DoDo.
Search for posted internships. Begin with the systems tailored to Princeton students: TigerTracks is exclusive to Princeton and is also used for on-campus recruiting, while UCAN is an internship system housing postings from 20 selective colleges from coast-to-coast. Current students are automatically given TigerTracks accounts; for UCAN, please register for a new account. Refer to the Tip Sheet to help you search these systems.
do you know how to get to TigerTrack?
http://www.princeton.edu/career/undergrads/internships/how-to-find/.
how is midterm?
preparation.
anything I can help you with?
DoDo.
anything i can help?
really focus ok.
really learn.
learn well, especiallly CS.
how are you? tongith will be even colder.
want me to bring you some swether?
learn the data structure and alg really really really well.
by the way.
did you update the resume i sent to you?
since the contractors are home, i cann't go anywhere, i have time to update your resume.
My Dear DoDo.
how are you?
what are you doing?
dont watch TV.
Hello, My dear.
how are you?
good busy, right? not busy handing out, or ineffective, right.
ok, love you.
How are you, my dear DoDo.
DoDo, working hard and focus?
How are you, my dear.
k.
anything i can help?
what is " ??"?
meaning?
homeless?
you use the wrong chinese character.
but they have relatives there.
k.
how many pages you need.
i can help you.
chinese rural area - depended on community, neightbors' help uch more than city parents, or much much more than western.
but this also shaped the leftover children's value systems -
but this is really a way to illustrate chinese family value.
those parents go to city, they don't abandon their family - they still spent 4 days on the train to go home during holidays.
just like the Phillphine, Indonisia people comeing to Taiwan to help, to make a living to send money to their home.
this is really a problem about the gaps of the wealth.
do you know the problem is not unique in CHina?
remember all the live-in you see at Grandma's house, they are also leaving their young kids at home.
do you have time to talk.
i can call you to explain thsi to you more.
but in CHina, the wealth gaps and opportuntiies gaps between rural and cities are much bigger.
k.
one solution is what china's been doing: metropolianize/cities their people - migrating rural area people to metropolitan area; this will boost their economics growth - and offers jobs at closer location to their home.
another solution is harder - this si to reduce the gaps on job opportunties among rural and cities - this needs education - platform the fields - enable the virtual work space - this only works for high tech/high skills - so it's a long term solution.
New York Time had an artcile on CHina's moving people to cities.
China’s Great Uprooting: Moving 250 Million Into Cities.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/16/world/asia/chinas-great-uprooting-moving-250-million-into-cities.html.
their purpose it to boost their economics, but this is also a solution to the left-behind children problem.
want me to call you?
http://futuristicforester.blogspot.com/2009/09/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-living.html.
what do you mean no?
no time to talk, or you don't agree this si a solution to left-behind children?
this IS a solution to left-behind children.
the parents left to city for job, this way, the government brings the cities to the parents.
and jobs along the way.
of course, by doing this, they are risking some other disadvantage, but overall, from the big scale of things, is the best solution at this point.
are you ok?
i am at office, i am going to head home now.
i should be home in another 40 min.
want to talk to me before i logout?
no, means what?
do you understand the solution?
or no, means don't call you.
if you are wise, this is a very good solution.
only CHina cna do it with their authoritiy govierment.
anyway.
loging out now.
will be home in 40 min, ok.
I LOVE YOU.
I will help you.
it's going to be very cold tonight.
dress warm.
tomorrow's high is only 50.
i can bring you swether over to you.
do you need it.
How are you, my dear.
