that's fine.
clean your room.
let me know what else you need today.
so i can bring them with me.
i am leaving to Comcast tomorrow morning.
so let me know before tonight 10PM.
A common metaphor for explaining the Higgs field is to envision an "invisible molasses" filling all of space, which exerts a drag on particles as they "burrow" through it. And it is this drag that we commonly call the particle's mass. Some particles are "stickier" than others--they feel the effect of the molasses more strongly, and so those particles are more massive. Less sticky particles are lighter, and particles like the photon are completely "slippery"-- passing through the Higgs field without feeling any drag at all--and so have no mass. This is a fine metaphor to have in mind. I have used it repeatedly as it paints a reasonable and intuitive picture of the Higgs idea. But I also like to point out where metaphors fail (most do at some point); here's one prominent way that the molasses metaphor is misleading. The metaphor leads one to think that the Higgs field constantly exerts a drag force on any given particle, continually slowing its speed until it grinds to a halt. But that's not true. Particles wafting through space, on which no other forces are acting, just keep on going. The Higgs doesn't stop them. Instead, the Higgs 'drag" only comes into play when a particle is accelerating (or decelerating). Just as it is hard to push a car to increase (or decrease) its speed because the car has a big mass, the more massive a particle the harder it is to CHANGE its speed. And according to the Higgs idea, this resistance to CHANGES in the particle's speed (or direction of motion) reflects the influence of the all pervasive Higgs field through which the particle is moving. Real molasses doesn't behave this way, as its drag would NOT only be exerted when a particle was accelerating or decelerating--its drag would be exerted even when an object moves through it at constant velocity. So, is there a better metaphor? No doubt there is. Wave refraction as a wave moves from one medium to another is a good place to start, but I won't try to develop that metaphor here. Bottom line: If you find yourself thinking about the Higgs, feel free to use the molasses metaphor. But also keep in mind its limits. --BG.
hey Dodo.
Dodo.
how are you?
friday evening - don't schedule anything between 5-8.
we will go to verizon store.
but i still think iPhone 4 is enough.
anyway.
how is your Math?
you said you will tell me later.
then change it to 201.
it's important you learn the fundation well.
even 201 - still need hard work.
but i need you to learn it well.
foundation is very important.
anyway, don't get discourage either, just divide and counger (sp?).
conquer.
Dodo.
how are you?
still in class?
so you come with me to verizon wireless to place order tomorrow.
it's really expensive.
with iPhone 5, my monthly increase $150.
does it worth it?
actually i think i will buy iphone 5 for you on ATT.
and veriazon just for me and Ann.
this should also apply to iPhone 5.
http://ipod.about.com/od/introductiontotheiphone/a/iphone-3gs-rates.htm.
ATT's rate seems to be better.
i can make Ann individual unlimited talk and text for $40, then you will be $104, after tax, Ann and you will be $43, $110.
that's probably better.
so I can make you ATT, Ann verizon.
ATT's cover international.
if you are going to China next summer, you'd need to be on ATT.
i think so, but let's visit ATT wireless store.
Mobile Discounts - Student Telephone Services - Princeton Universitywww.princeton.edu/studentphone/mobile-telephone/Cached - SimilarShare Shared on Google+. View the post. You +1'd this publicly. Undo Jun 18, 2012 – Princeton University Students are now included in the University's ... visit AT&T online or call the Princeton AT&T store at (609) 987-9663.
it's like ATT give Princeton student discount.
but not verizon.
ATT and Verizon all at Mercer Mall, near Princeton.
we will go visit tomorrow and find out the details.
they give comcast 20% discount, i beleive.
hey, i can bring over the green ethernet cable to you on Monday 6PM.
how r u.
i can bring over the green ethernet cable to you on Monday 6PM.
or you can see if u can move the router closer to center.
friday.
i will be there friday.
hw?
get good sleep?
how is your laptop.
Do Do, how are you?
how is your laptop? Do you have laptop to use?
k.
do you have laptop to do your work?
so the hard drive is the one with the laptop itself, nto the faster one from your desktop?
k.
it's not surprise to knwo the faster one not work with your laptop.
it's not with the orig laptop.
anyway, the importance thing is , don't let the problem slow your progress in academic, ok.
still in class or out?
dress warm?
i can help you more on your chinese.
i installed google ping-yin on my laptop.
it's also on that big old laptop.
if you hit ALT+Shift, then it will switch from ENglish to Chinese.
then you can use ping-yin, then chinese character will come out.
i can teach you how to use it.
Daway how are you?
how are your classes?
need anything when i come on friday?
k.
where is the window 7 disks?
k.
not sure.
iwill check this Thursday night.
DoDo, does your dorm has heater?
is your comforter warm enough? I'd like to bring you another warmer comforter.
is heater on?
dress warm.
drink a lot of water, (NOT alcohol!). Your grandpa passed away from liver cancer - becasue he drank too much alcohol when he was young, do you know that.
k. step up to challenges and your potential.
Hello, My Dear!
how are you?
Hi Dodo.
found your blue sweather.
k.
and grey sweather.
why?
what's the occuasion?
k.
how are your classes?
k.
focus.
determination.
