i also have another idea.
wiatiing for your startup.
do you know China is a place skip internet era to mobile directly.
people in china - booking hotel, airplain,.. all need to have a cell phone number, - did you notice that?
they use mobile more on things than using internet/laptop.
so some applications we (US - where we has internet era) take for granted, but it's lacking in China -
e.g. we use excel much more than CHina.
so there are some heavy calculation apps are lacking in mobile.
we need to simply those app to mobile.
sorting.
e..g sorting.
operations that easier for mouse, but hearder for mobile/smart phone.
operations that's easier for mouse, those operations need to be simplied for smartphone.
don't tell others.
those you can create a startup and be very successful.
but you can start it as your project.
or thesis.
right now, there is no good excel type app in mobile.
basically no good apps that good for typing inputs on mobile.
it's hard to manupilate data on mobile.
so mobile still have a lot to do to become a real computing device.
cannot fully replace laptop yet.
do you want me to call you? I can talk to you, it's easier to explain.
do you understnad my thoughts?
also, like power point, mobile doesn't have good displace space.
so the future presetnation on mobiile will be differnet from powerpoint.
mobile has something laptop doesn't have.
it's vedio.
so need to "common-ize" the icon, graph to make the preparation on mobile easier.
users need some drag and drop library to create presentation on teir mobile.
all those can be used for startup.
but you can start as your student projects.
i sign up for PPPL tour.
i think you should too.
to widen the knowledge.
what is the video?
it's gone?
who post it?
Do you want more idea in projects?
or you have something to start?
how about the project - make the mobile phone number change seamlessly for users - that is, if you are a telephone company, when you change your cell phone number - i can have an app to update all your bank record, credit card,... record with your new cell phone number.
i.e. putting intelligence into your cell phone number.
it knows where it got stored as a key.
e.g. on your gmail account, you have entered your cell phone in case you lost your password.
and your cell phone number has the intelligence knowing where it's been stored as a key.
and when you change your cell phone number to a new one, the old phone will trigger all the "stored" key to update to the new phone number.
no, this is a very smart proj.
what's the project need.
if you can make this project work, you will become millionair, you don't need to finish college.
like bill gate.
or facebook guy.
why you think this is not smart enough.
why?
but you can use a database.
as long as the database - as the bank system.
open source database.
what you need is a free software will automatic txt back.
what's your project's description?
what's your project requirement?
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_Message_Service.
just sent you something.
i am going to bed now.
GN.
do you understand my idea.
if you can just write a smart phone app to process SMS that it received.
that's quite good already.
how are you?
Dear DoDo.
how are you?
need clothes, help on chinese?
k.
http://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2011/04/Shelby.pdf.
DoDo, how are you?
My Dear DoDo.
how are you? need help on CHinese?
ok.
this Sunday afternoon till Tuesday afternoon I will be at NYC for conference.
do you need anything from home, you need to let me know before Sunday, ok.
ok.
My Dear DoDo.
how are you.
what's the history/significant of your new cover picture?
k.
how are your classes?
Dodo.
have time to install the chanderlier for me ?
do you have time to have dinner with me?
i can go to your dorm to eat with you.
or i can take you to eat out.
busy on what?
tell me more about your activities.
please.
DoDo.
you went to movie tonight?
How was the movie?
is it good? Hey,how are your computer science? financial aid, and internships.
I really want to take you to the haircut place - she is a good hair dresser, and need business.
it's at Leigh Ave - 0.5 mile away from princeton public library.
anyway, call me later - we can go at 3, or 4, then you can go back right away.
did you finish financial aid things?
