s vision.
GN, My dear, tomorrow not just icy, but windy too. so wear hat and glove!!
hope you stay dry.
DoDo, are you dry? change any wet clothes, ok.
how are you, my dear.
peifongren/Daway888.
yes.
did you get in?
How are you?
My Dear DoDo.
How are you, DODO?
tell me more about the happenings in your days.
good busy with energy? or frustration?
My Dear DoDo.
Did you write to Japan? If not, please do that today. also, familiar with your own resume and cover letter to prepare the Nokia interview. LOTS OF LOVE!
How are you, my dear.
DoDo, i will stop by sometimes on Sunday to pick up the shovel, ok.
since next Tuesday/Wed might have snow again.
How are you dodo.
great!
how about Japan?
YES!
send email to the 2nd one too.
tell them you would really love to have the opportunity.
want me take you for haircut?
when are you flying to NC?
i can drive you down.
i know.
but i can drive you down if you like.
give yourself adequate time for transits, ok.
MAKE SURE YOU APPLY THOSE RESEARCH OPPOTUNITY.
LOVE YOU!
DoDO.
how are you?
Dodo how r u?
Don't forget to apply research It's very important. If I can help. I will help.
I love you.
How r u? My dear.
Did they say when they will let u know?
Apply the research opportunities and yesterday's two opportunities. The deadline is 2/28. That's tomorrow.
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/13109588/base64-encoding-in-java.
Di sent you some code.
will that help?
check your gmail.
If you have questions, you can write to his email addr, but i am not sure if he will asnwer since it's late.
but he sent the code over.
k.
did you apply research opportunities?
just send it.
your resume and cover letter are good!
i am going to bed. do you need anything?
daway let me know if you got it ok? Di is asking me.
My Dear DoDo.
how are you?
apply the research opportunity, even you are late, still apply.
did you get my msg?
your package from amazon arrived.
do you want to trailer today.
they close at 5.
or tomorow.
but if he drove and got into accident, he will need to pay the cost of car fixing.
will it be easier to get a rental?
so you won't hurt his feeling?
k.
ok. thsi weekend, i need to talk to you more about this.
Love. Work Hard!
Daway, for your trip, I need you to shorten a day or two. come back on Friday! I need you to allocate some time to yourself and your family!
Daway, doing research at Princeton is better than back to Taiwan. trust me. - still keep this option. Also, what if Chou YonCHun cannot find something for you.
Daway.
https://connect12.uc.att.com/attinc4/meet/?ExEventID=89203513.
you need to click and install the conference code.
then you can join the conference, and share the screen.
it will be very easy.
ok, use Web-Base.
and use call-me for voice.
Send me all your C++ errors -
and program/code, plus the C++ compilor errors.
if you send me your code and errors, now Aynang, and Bing all get back, they can take a look, and Suresh also back.
but debugging takes time.
Check email!
Scott said he can take a look.
he is younger, also graduated from Princeton 15 years ago.
he said he did C++ a bit.
anyway, check your email. it has his phone number.
k.
but print out the values, one problem a time.
call me.
How are you, DoDo?
Anything i can help?
it's also here: http://homes.cs.washington.edu/~edzhang/graphics/a2.html.
Truncate used the following algorithm Generate all new vertices - for each halfedge, we put a new vertex t of the way from its source to its next->source. The only subtlety is, if t=0.5, then there is only one vertex for each pair of halfedges. We keep track of new vertices by using a map from halfedge to new vertex Generate faces for truncated vertices - each vertex on the old mesh now has a new face with a number of vertices equal to the number of outedges it had previously. Conveniently, these vertices correspond exactly to the halfedge to vertec map we constructed while adding new vertices. Generate faces corresponding to old faces - now we iterate over each face's halfedges. For each edge in the old face, there are two new vertices (or only one if t=0.5). These vertices are simply the ones that are associated with the face's halfedges and the twins of those halfedges.
Splitting faces made use of a subroutine to make Loop subdivision easier. This subroutine was called R3Mesh::MidpointSplit(), which split each face into K+1 faces (where K is the number of vertices on the face) by connecting adjacent edge midpoints. This function worked in two passes: in the first pass it iterated over all faces and created the edge midpoints and the central face; the second pass iterated over each vertex of each face and added the face corresponding to that vertex. This subroutine took one parameter that, given the two endpoints of an edge, determined the coordinates of the corresponding edge midpoint. For splitting faces, these coordinates were simply the midpoint of the edge. However, for loop subdivision, a different function was used.
he added something to the header file? did you read the beginning.
if needed, i can search more.
more code can be found here: http://openmesh.org/Documentation/OpenMesh-2.1-Documentation/files.html.
does the algorithm in that URL help?
k. this kid is on facebook, so i guess you can send him msg too.
anything i can help? give me error msg I can help you search.
U ok?
How is the proj?
