Daway, i am very happy you made the cliub tennis. but how did you do it? i thought you haven't played tennis for a long time.
Daway tell me ur tennis match schedule, ok. I love to watch some college games - never had that experience.
Daway.
DoDo.
DoDo.
Do you want to go over the Chinese w me?
you should say, the movie did make the point of the life is moving forward.
or something like that.
you didn't say anything why that movie is your favorate.
did you get emails on your returns?
yes, you should reply, i did.
amazon , right.
Xi-Ang.
Xi'an, also called Changan is the largest city in north-west China. It had served as the nation's capital for 13 dynasties such as Western Zhou (11th century BC - 771 BC), Qin (221 BC - 206 BC), Western Han (206 BC - 24 AD) and Tang (618 - 907) for more than 1000 years. It is famous for historical importance. Top attractions in Xian: Terra-cotta Army, Banpo Museum, Huaqing Hotspring, City Wall, Big Goose Pagoda, Shaanxi Provincial Museum, Xian Great Mosque, Forest of Stone Steles Museum and more..
you should see this place - it's more menaingful than Shianghai.
well, depends.
You were at Shanghai before.
iif i were you, i will just stay at shanghai for 1 day or even skip it.
you willl need to skip Hong Kong.
adding Hongkong will blow out your budget.
i will go to Yellow Mountain, and Xian.
Xian is an inland city, so you will see the real china.
Shanghai and Beijin are all westernized.
you will not get any culture shock there.
but Xian - you will see some real china.
Shanghai - the most valuable experience is the night boat ride.
all the shopping places - remember the crowded alley? is not enjoyable.
you need to have a budget for this trip.
anyway, i am going to bed now.
please don't let the trip out of control.
shwo me your budget plan.
then you will not get too crazy.
anywya, good night.
eat your viatiimin.
study, and talk to the professor!!!
gn.
I will go with you then - it's my life long wish to visit those places, and I have a ticket to Shanghai that I have to use it this year (from last year's since i cancel the trip).
I can move fast or wait for u on the foot of mountain. I can mtg u at shanghai them we flow to xian.
I don't want u travel alone in china.
I can take trains.
Anyway heading home now ttyl.
hot today there?
got proper clothes?
you can go ahead to do the hiking, i will wait for you.
there is no way i let you travel alone.
period.
even you think you are so strong and healthy, you might get food digesting problem.
it's not a joke.
ok, then i will wait for you 2 days.
hey, the tennis is for club tennis or the division A tennis?
do you need anything for the match?
the code is 473.
Daway.
Daway.
the code you need.
why do you need it?
pay with your American Express.
k.
it's not 4 digiti code.
just 3.
for Visa.
the name is Peifong Ren.
do you have the complete digit for the Amazon's card?
the expiration date is 11/13.
k.
from amazon.com?
how did you find it?
smart.
good.
My dear dodo.
how are you?
DoDo, how are you?
study hard? talking to prof?
do you need anything from me beside the check?
tell me what else you need.
i can either come after work either monday or wed, but not tuesday.
k.
hurry, i want to go to bed at 11.
Daway,
DoDo.
I finished Hobbit - the movie.
so they break it into 3?
what a horrible act!
why??
so what is the end of their adventure?
didn't all dwarfs died?
so did they reclaim the lonely mountain at the end?
ok, i just read wiki on the sotry line.
how are you?
Need help on Chinese?
did you talk to prof?
Don't postponed it.
Daway.
Daway.
no party, no drinking,
go to bed.
whole heartly study.
GN.
Daway.
Daway,
