dont IM or txt others. either review the topic or have some nice conversation with teacher/classmates.
tell us everything - dinner, speachers, roommate,....etc, etc, etc love.
Are people there smart?
haha, there is a girl, princeton, an MIT, a Harvard.
Jesse Villines is a senior in high school and lives in Soda Springs, ID. After high school, he plans on attending the University of Idaho, where he has been accepted into the Honors College. Jesse received his Eagle Scout award at the age of 16 and continued to be active with the Boy Scouts of America by being a leading member of a Venturing Crew. He participates in track at Soda Springs High School and placed third in the Idaho High School Track and Field State Championship for the 110m hurdles as a junior. He enjoys being involved in his community by participating in activities such as the Cancer Relay for Life, nursing home visitation, Special Olympics bowling, and a community kids' club. Jesse also traveled to Brazil for three weeks to do volunteer service work. His many interests include snowboarding, backpacking, running, and reading.
but only 15 boys.
well, just relax and enjoy.
don't stay up IMs, ok?
how was dinner?
what do you have?
did you setup wake up call?
go to bed now, ok?
if you need any help, call staffers, right?
got enough pillow, blanket?
good night.
check your school email.
see what work needs to do.
and see if Anv is ok car pooling.
have a good dream.
bye.
write down everything you learn, and do over there.
Ann wants all the details.
loging out now,
take good care of yourself.
bye.
Check off your school email/work, so if you need anything done, let me know so we can call school.
Hey, write us something. by the way, do you know there are 9 kids from Home School. such high percentage, is it because they are raised to have critical thinking or they have more time to do the essay research?
When you talk to the staffer, just picture what kind of people you would like a freshman who just join Math League or newspaper that you like to talk to them about. I totally agree with Ann, no politics, but find out about their passion, what drives them, what they learn....
Hey, be friend with Illinois, Rhode Island, Hawaii and Kenya,.....Denver (he is an all-state tennis player, you know).
I am home.
did you read Rhode Scholars?
read it NOW.
i will check with you in an hour.
and quiz you.
is the grammar correct?
Anya, The boys have moved in fine. Thank you. The internet/Wifi also works. :-) There are still some food left in the refrigerator. luckily the boys don't use too much space there. Also, the 2nd right drawer of the work bench cannot be closed at your daughter's bedroom.
do i need to say the 2nd drawer.
There are still some food in the refrigerator. luckily the boys don't use too much space there. Also, the 2nd drawer of the work bench cannot be closed at the bed room.
is this ok.
"There are still some food in the refrigerator. luckily the boys don't use too much space there. Also, the 2nd drawer of the work bench cannot be closed at the bed room.".
be a scholar,don't surf - especially your laptop has no virus software!!
so did you read Rhode Scholar?
need a wire.
connect to your computer.
k.
which scholar most impressed you?
how about the princeton girl.
and which one you think is the most similar to you.
she did two research project (independant study) at her junior.
that got herabove others.
be inspired. by those people.
when are you going to bed?
k.
set alarm on your cell too.
ok?
good night.
don't surf.
go to bed.
did you have time cook breakfast?
k.
any interesting conversation/people?
are those mentors good?
what's your plan this evening?
k.
then you have plenty of time to learn how to cook dumpling.
and clean up afterwards.
make sure later you check your alarm clock is set.
i jsut want to know how do you do your lunch?
they didn't buy it for kids?
do they have good lunch?
use the lunch time to talk to more people, ok.
listen and learn what research they are doing etc.
expand your world.
hey, did you eat?
it's not bothering you.
i need you to show me that you can take good care of yourself.
ok, then tell me after you eat. ok.
and keep the house clean.
the charger doesn't work?
did you try push it in further?
did you try different outlet?
ok. i will have derek bring the charger to you then.
or you can wait till weeekend?
ok.
what did you have for dinner?
Daway!
there are also soup can, and shao-bin.
and bean salad.
you should have cook tonight.
did you set up your alarm clock?
everyone, Ann, grandma,... and most important, I - worry that you are too easy on money.
how much you spent on lunch and dinner?
together?
where did you eat dinner?
sigh.
did you drink juice?
milk?
cereal?
wash dishes?
