Lily Xie
SOC209 // Rutherford
March 3, 2013

Assessing the Role of Capital in Social Structure and the Agentic Formation of Class
      
      
      Max Weber (1958), in his influential work “Class, Status, Party”, deconstructs social power into three forms: wealth, the amount of goods and services at one’s disposal; prestige, the power of social alliances and the amount of respect one is granted; and power, one’s ability to achieve their will despite the opposition of others’. In the contemporary American context, there is a severe imbalance in the distribution of social power. One example of this can be seen through the distribution of wealth and income - according to an analysis published by Professor G. William Domhoff from the University of California at Santa Cruz (2013), the top one percent of households own 42% of all financial wealth while the bottom 80% of households own only 5%. This imbalance is caused by a structure of social power that is hierarchical and stratified by class. This structure perpetuates an economy of power, expressed through capital, which favors those on top and disfavors those below. This social structure must be constantly maintained by the process of achieving and preserving social capital. However, the forces that influence the stratification of power in America are tied to not only structure, but also agent. The agentic responses to a structure that values capital forms the basic structure of class and social power in contemporary America. 
      Pierre Bourdieu (1986), in his seminal work, “The Forms of Capital”, introduces the notion of capital as accumulated labor translated into social energy. He breaks down this definition into three distinct categories - economic capital, including wealth, income, and property, which provides financial power; social capital, or networks and alliances, which provide the power of prestige and influence; and cultural capital, defined as the embodied, objectified, and institutional set of skills and tastes, which provides status and rank. Bourdieu argues that the supply and demand of capital defines the basic framework of class. The economic lexicon is by no means accidental – just as money acts in economic transactions as a medium of exchange, so does capital as a social medium of exchange between agents and resources. Capital is essentially currency that can be exchanged for social resources. The more capital one has, the easier it is to access economic resources, status, power, education, and so on. Capital, like money, is in and of itself symbolic. Money is no more than pieces of paper; the value we attribute to the means of exchange is just as important as the exchange itself. Likewise, capital without social structure is meaningless. We can consider capital a type of social currency whose value lies in its ability to be transformed into various types of privilege. Capital ‘buys’ social resources, and consequently the structure of the social world is defined by the supply and demand of capital.
      As an aside, it is important to note that Bourdieu’s separation of these forms of capital into distinct categories is somewhat simplistic. While dividing the sources of power into types of capital is useful for the purpose of cataloguing, in reality all forms of capital are so deeply interconnected that untangling them from one another is unrealistic enough to be misleading. We see this when we attempt to integrate Weber’s definition of social power into Bourdieu’s categories of capital - for example, wealth is economic capital, as it is directly convertible into money, but can also be considered social capital because it is a precondition to accessing elite social networks as well as cultural capital because it is necessary for the acquisition of objectified capital. Certain forms of capital reinforce and presuppose others. Therefore, the different types of capital are ultimately symbiotic. The varied acquisition of economic, social, and cultural capital is not only mutually beneficial but also obligate; that is, all forms of capital are dependent on each other and would not otherwise exist.
      The current social structure in America is hierarchical because it values and rewards the acquisition of capital while simultaneously limiting the channels through which capital can be acquired. Here, it is helpful to return again to the economic model of capital suggested initially in Bourdieu’s work. The most important difference between the model of supply and demand in the free market and the supply and demand of capital is that, in the market economy, transactions are mutually beneficial. Suppliers benefit from consumers purchasing their goods, and vice versa. Conversely, transactions of capital are not mutually beneficial. Whoever holds capital is always better off and whoever does not is always worse off. Therefore, the incentive for social agents is not to establish an equilibrium, like the actors in the free market, but rather to establish a hierarchical system of unbalanced capital, with the few at the top protecting their assets and those at the bottom aspiring for them. 
      However, to analyze individual social agents purely through a structural lens is far too simplistic. People are ultimately capable of choice, and therefore of intentionally influencing structure. In reality, the relationship between capital and social hierarchy only constitutes half of the picture - the tension between the structural social hierarchy and the agentic formation of class is what truly defines contemporary American class. Michele Lamont’s article analyzing the boundaries drawn by the working class, “Assessing ‘People Above’ and ‘People Below’”, is particularly helpful in articulating this tension. Lamont (2000) found, “The overall pattern that emerges from the interviews is one whereby the poor, like blacks, are often defined in opposition to ‘people like us’ and ‘our values’, and whereby ‘people above’ are simultaneously in and out, with values to reject but a socioeconomic status to aspire to” (p.102). Lamont’s description of the working class paints a picture where people are drawn to the privilege attached to capital - specifically, status and wealth, or social and economic capital - and simultaneously resistant to the cultural assimilation necessary to overcome the boundaries of class. While the values and rewards attached to capital is structural, the formation of class itself is agentic.
      Social closure is the most integral agentic component in the formation of a structural class-based hierarchy. All hierarchies demand constant upkeep through the construction and maintenance of boundaries between classes. Institutionalized capital demands social closure, and the two combined create a striated class structure. Thus, social closure is the primary tool used in maintaining class boundaries. Though it is important to note that social exclusion and the creation of class boundaries is universal and exists within every social class, in deconstructing social closure’s role in the creation of class, it is helpful to begin at the top of the social hierarchy. A top-down analysis of class is important because in a system where the unequal distribution of capital favors the elite, the social boundaries set by the elite define the barriers to capital acquisition and consequently the overall social structure. At the top of the social hierarchy, the inherent non-expansibility of status elevates the importance of exclusion. Status is a relative measure of power, and therefore a matter of percentages. Especially for the elite, status is only important so long as it is exclusive - if everyone had high status, no one does. In her piece “Learning the Ropes: The Childhood and College Years of Elite Women”, Diana Kendall’s analysis of the families of elite girls provide a helpful tool for concretely breaking down methods of exclusion. In particular, Kendall examines two distinct tools of social closure - social reproduction and the maintenance of social boundaries. It is important to note that while Kendall focuses on the elite, the use of these tools is by no means limited to only one class.
      Both boundary maintenance and social reproduction are integral to the formation of a hierarchical social structure. Though the two overlap in many important ways, for the purpose of analysis, it is helpful to separate them for clarity. Social reproduction is the means to an end of social boundaries. In her article, Kendall (2002) describes social reproduction as ‘learning the ropes’ - the process of inheriting the types of capital that allow for the creation of social boundaries. In particular, Kendall writes about anticipatory socialization, the process by which knowledge and skills are learned for future roles. Social reproduction is the most important way of transferring capital from one generation to the next. These ‘appropriate’ behaviors and beliefs that are passed from parents to children contribute most notably to the formation of habitus, the embodied set of dispositions, skills, and tastes linked to the acquisition of cultural capital at an early age. Shared habitus allows for people of similar class upbringings to essentially ‘speak the same language’. In this way, anticipatory socialization is by definition exclusionary because it provides only those raised by members of a social class with the correct markers of cultural capital for acceptance within that same social class. For the elites, social reproduction is also strongly tied to social capital and economic capital by providing inherited capital, both in terms of economic wealth as well as social groupings and alliances. The exclusionary formation of class through social reproduction ensures that a class’ capital stays ‘within the family’, and therefore helps reinforce the preexisting social hierarchy.
      If social reproduction serves as the internal device that allows for the preservation of capital, then boundary maintenance is the external gatekeeper of the privilege of capital. Boundary maintenance is the definition and upkeep of social boundaries integral to the preservation of a hierarchical social structure. Kendall (2002) sums up boundary maintenance quite succinctly as “the ability to associate with those - and only those - people with whom one chooses to associate” (p. 82). Here, Kendall successfully links exclusion with the privilege of choice. As all privilege is, as previously noted, linked to capital, there is an important tie between capital and exclusion that must be cultivated in order to retain the importance of both. Kendall (2002) writes, “Typically, the women in my study grew up in exclusive neighborhoods, attended exclusive schools, dined at exclusive private clubs, and belonged to exclusive organizations as a result of their parents’ wealth and social position” (p. 82). We see from this example that social boundaries can be institutional, such as membership in certain clubs or schools; residential, defined by neighborhood or location; or even a matter of social networks, or ‘who’s who’. Thus, we see a clear connection between types of capital and delineations of social boundaries - economic capital provides the financial means for exclusion, cultural capital provides the cultural ‘stamp of approval’ and shared habitus of belonging, and social capital provides reinforcement of boundaries through the creation of an in-group that inherently excludes outsiders. The power of social exclusion is inextricably linked to boundary maintenance through the formation of classes of people based on their economic, social, and cultural capital. 
      In examining the elite class, we see the ways that the formation of class through social closure reinforces the preexisting social hierarchy. This is in large part because the current social hierarchy benefits the elites. It is ultimately best for the elite class to echo the structural valuation of social capital in their agentic formation of class. At the top of the hierarchy, the structural and agentic social structures feed into and reinforce each other. However, as we have seen earlier in Lamont’s analysis of the working class, this is not true further down on the hierarchy. We see from Lamont’s (2002) study that social closure is just as present in the working class as it is in the elite class; however, the working class’ forms of social closure includes not only the downward rejection of capital from the lower class but also the upward rejection of capital from the higher class. It is in this dichotomy that we can perceive the tension between social hierarchy and the agentic formation of class. The downward exclusion of the lower class models the social closure of the elite - a class using exclusion to distinguish itself as being better than a lower class perpetuates the structural valuation of capital. Here, the agentic formation of class and the social hierarchy reinforce each other. The upward exclusion of the upper class displays a choice to reject the dominant capital and therefore affirm moral worth to their own position in society. Here, the agentic formation of class pushes against the structure of the social hierarchy. Ultimately, it is the tension between agent and structure that defines the formation of hierarchy and class. 
      There are many conclusions that can be drawn about social structure from the examination of the various types of capital. Speaking generally, the most fundamental fact that capital can be acquired as well as lost sets up a hierarchical social system that values self-interest. Capital is desirable because it is attached to valuable resources, and the fact that capital can be gained or lost incentivizes agents to act with self-interest in the pursuit and preservation of capital. Social closure is the most effective tool to preserve and transfer capital across generations. In this way, social closure is the catalyst that leads to the formation of class. The types of capital that are desired or rejected in a social class are also impacted by social closure as well as relative position in the social hierarchy. Capital offers the reward of social resources but also a loss of identity and agency; conversely, an agentic formation of class gives a social group worth and meaning, but at the risk of losing social resources. The process of finding a balance between agent and structure ultimately defines the social structure in America today.
      
      

References
      
      Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. Inequality and Society. 
      Domhoff, G. W. (2013). Wealth, Income, and Power. Power in America. http://www2.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/wealth.html
      Kendall, D. (2002). Learning the Ropes: The Childhood and College Years of Elite Women. The Power of Good Deeds. 
      Lamont, M. (2000). Assessing “People Above” and “People Below”. The Dignity of Working Men.
      Weber, M. (1958). Class, Status, Party. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology.



1
Assessing the Role of Capital in Social Structure and the Agentic Formation of Class







