lolol.
i didn't order it.
vom.
ok i'm gonna go read.
FOR PLEASURE.
there, there.
the light in the forest.
ooh yeah i have.
i'm so glad you like it!!
:).
yeah it's beautiful.
it's beautifully shot.
yeah she really likes christmas.
gl.
hm.
keyi.
colouuuuuuur.
yeah i watched part of moonrise kingdom.
you mean the actress or the movie.
audrey tatou if i recall correctly.
tautou.
dui, dui.
but come on look how pretty she is here http://clementsgeoff.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/audrey-tautou.jpg.
that in itself seems like something that would happen in the movie.
http://justcomedies.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Amelie_066.jpg lol.
another movie you might like is Lola Rennt.
aka run lola run.
it's in german.
it also features a heroine with short hair.
franka potenta, ni zhidao ta ma?
it's not as cute or fun as amelie but it's interesting.
haha yeah.
oh i didn't realize he did cloud atlas.
no but i heard about it.
no.
you repulse me.
no i don't think i do.
:'(.
loll.
oh i thought it was vindictive pleasure that i didn't know how to write jingcha.
hahaha "cancer in city form".
that's funny.
maybe i won't do chemistry.
yeahhhhhh...
i'm just... not that interested...
ugh yeah.
idk.
:'(.
have you ever heard of deep springs college?
they were going to accept women for the first time this coming year.
i don't think it is.
i'd transfer, honestly, if i got in.
wait what?
oh.
in a different context...
they're not accepting women next year. maybe the year after that.
in a different context, that sentence: "uh oh period coming out".
yeah but i would.
i probably wouldn't get in.
their acceptance rate is already like 8%.
and if they're opening the pool to women.
that's like 300-400 people competing for 12 spots.
somebody could've had a nosebleed.
would you really? haha.
um to the helping me, not recognizing period blood.
i would value your input.
maybe.
haha.
i can't go next year anyway.
you get me for another year at least.
but really do you see how that would be perfect for me?
shouldn't you be asking my motivation for going?
i mean they do everything themselves there.
milk the cows, pitch the hay, cook their meals, herd the cattle.
they're not coddled the way we are here.
ha.
the kind of discipline that you need to do that is something that's really important character-wise.
and it's something that's always attracted me about the farming way of life.
i like that they're disconnected from all the social networking and social climbing we have here.
it's honest. it's about finding out who you are rather than who others want or expect you to be.
as it is here.
how so.
haha...
yeah which is freaking awesome.
who cares? i'm not living my life to become a ceo at some company or make connections with high-powered people.
i want to figure out how to build a community and shape my life story.
well, how do you define "the real world"?
what if i want to be a cattle-farmer.
i think figuring out what kind of person i want to be is more important than advancing a career.
and it's hard to figure out who you honestly want to be here, when there are so many expectations put on you.
and when it's so much easier just to go along with the conventional way of things than to confront your thoughts and think about it truthfully.
what? i do want to create something.
i was looking through some things from when i was in kindergarten.
and one of those things was a letter from my mom to my teacher.
all the parents had to write one.
and she said something along the lines of, "I think Hannah is truly special and capable of achieving something great - maybe even a Nobel Prize in science".
but.
i don't see that happening.
not just because i'm not that good at science.
but because i don't have the same desire you do.
