good night!!
when?
it's funny, because i really love the early mornings.
but i'm so rarely awake to see them the way they're supposed to be seen.
wow.
that's crazy :/.
hahhhhh oh my gosh.
if only i had read jane eyre more recently.
yeah.
so you're a mr. rochester, then?
hm well you sort of are.
well i guess not really.
st. john, then? lolol.
it's kind of cute how shirley's canines are so pointy https://fbcdn-sphotos-c-a.akamaihd.net/hphotos-ak-prn2/7907_10151641745324241_658829057_n.jpg.
shenme?
seriously :O.
omg.
oh did you not get there yet?
oops.
cut his penis, like drew blood??
ooooooh........
:E.
hahaha i saw that.
but it's ??, not ??
your name is safe.
btw my grandpa saw the status you made for me and told my mom he was worried i was depressed -_-
lawl.
you're going to hate middlemarch.
this girl is such a twit.
i'm on page 79 and it's not very easy but it's not awful.
lolll funny you say that because i said "twat" earlier and my dad was like "THAT IS A VERY NASTY WORD" and i was like "really?" and he was like "it means cunt.".
i think hearing my dad say the word cunt was one of the weirdest experiences of my life.
and then he was like "i think you mean twit.".
i know 0_0.
seriously though she's so annoying. like this guy asks her where she wants her room to be and she's like "It is very kind of you to think of that, but I assure you I would rather have all those matters decided for me. I shall be much happier to take everything as it is--just as you have been used to have it or as will yourself choose it to be. I have no motive for wishing anything else.".
like can you have some opinions plz thx.
no hah are you kidding the manosphere is all about women not having opinions.
hahahaha they are but they just think women's opinions don't matter.
the content of this post doesn't actually have much to do with the title, but i think it speaks for itself http://heartiste.wordpress.com/2007/04/16/her-opinion-is-of-no-consequence-at-all/.
Oh really whadja think.
haha yeah but that would have been a sad ending.
yeah the regaining sight was a little lame but this way he gets to see his son!!! how sad would you be if you couldn't see your children?
i have made very little progress on middlemarch.
well you can take it up with charlotte bronte.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yrD1ZaNwdsU.
she's so beautiful.
and she plays so beautifully.
yeah, i like her a lot too.
Reader, I married him.
"Good night, my -- ".
the part where he dresses up as an old woman is really frickin weird though.
hahaha.
one of my favorite parts is: “Laws and principles are not for the times when there is no temptation: they are for such moments as this, when body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigour ... If at my convenience I might break them, what would be their worth?”.
i had to look up that last one.
haha obviously.
no i have the whole book memorized.
mm maybe a year, two years ago?
oof.
did you watch valentina igoshina?
omg i think this is how you say laugh out loud: ?????
i like ??? better though.
but dasheng xiao chulai is so catchy.
i can't believe you finished jane eyre already, ugh :(.
i'm going to try and read more of middlemarch.
did i tell you i'm going into the city to see lang lang play at carnegie hall tomorrow?
dui, wo hen xingfen.
ok i'm going to go to bed.
night!!
Haha xingfen is excited. I just thought that might be one of the ones you know. And I slept from 8 to 2 so that's only 6 hours of sleep! Wo hen lei.
How are you not tired :'(.
ha.
Explains everything. Ok niiiight! And see you soonish.
then go to bed dummy.
-_- zzzzz.
Dui, hen wan.
Zzzzzzz.
Zzzzz.
Zz.
Zzz.
Shanks!!!
Zzzz.
Omg we have to read Tess of the durbervilles??!! I love that book!
God it's so sad though.
Yeah.
Ahhh Tess is really wonderful but really really sad :(.
Read middlemarch with me!!
Plz.
What.
There's a certain edition we need....
oh.
You are so frustrating.
Stop being such an over over overachiever.
I'm just reading them.
I'm not taking notes.
I guess now I'll have to start though.
mrmdnjffj.
NO.
Middlemarch!!
Come on.
:(.
