no i haven't.
what? no, it totally does.
why tell me about the pictures of turkey.
:O.
wow yeah that is crazy.
A BRUSH WITH DEATH.
almost.
you know what would be great right now? some shrimp.
but yeah, we are lucky.
yeah.
yeah to the shrimp.
no but also how we're not just born into nice families in america but we were born with above average intelligence and are attending one of the most prestigious institutions in the world.
like...
one sec.
there was a ted talk by cameron russell about winning the genetic lottery, and how she was really lucky to have been born tall and beautiful because it meant she could model.
but we're lucky too to have been born smart.
like obviously it takes a lot more work to make something of your brains than of your looks.
i know! but life is unfair.
all anybody can do is make the most of what he or she is given.
2 cliches make a right, everyone knows that.
?
what else can we do about it?
SOCIALISM FOR EVERYONE.
who will benefit from our being deeply upset?
this is like the homeless people question again.
yeah we can be upset about it, but we can't let it be something that consumes us.
when a person close to us dies, what do we do? we grieve, and then we move on. we still think of it from time to time and it helps us to keep perspective but we don't dwell on it constantly because that would make it impossible for us to live our own lives.
IT IS UNSETTLING BUT WHY SHOULD WE BE CONSTANTLY UNSETTLED?? it's not your fault you were born into privilege!
yes, i think so. why wouldn't it be?
i don't understand. do you think we should be constantly unsettled or not unsettled at all?
on a deeper level, how?
"Oh, it's a long story," August said. "I guess you've noticed -- May is special." "She sure does get upset easy," I said. "That's because May takes in things differently than the rest of us do." August reached over and laid her hand on my arm. "See, Lily, when you and I hear about some misery out there, it might make us feel bad for a while, but it doesn't wreck our whole world. It's like we have a built-in protection around our hearts that keeps the pain from overwhelming us. But May -- she doesn't have that. Everything just comes into her -- all the suffering out there -- and she feels as if it's happening to her. She can't tell the difference.".
guess.
it's the secret life of bees.
no, i don't think it's normal to "truly care." you don't truly care unless it happened to you. if everyone truly cared about everything that happened to everyone, the world would be a place full of constant suffering. i mean even more so than it is now. also evolutionarily it doesn't make sense to care about anyone besides you and your genetic kin.
ugh i'm just trying to solve the problem of your malaise.
oh man the fireworks look really cool.
i suck.
wow i am much more sympathetic to your woes than you are to mine.
aren't you going to find a quote from a book about how missing fireworks is ok if you were reading children's literature?
you suck.
jk u rock nvr change.
don't you have a/c?
really.
lol.
take a cold shower?
what.
i don't understand........
isn't that the point of a cold shower?
?
??
why else would you take a cold shower?
i... i think some people do...
:o ???
oh wait shoot also next weekend (7th-9th) I'll be at my cousin's wedding.
i guess sometime other than that would work though.
omg hamilton to hazlet is a 90 minute train ride.
that's longer than nyc.
and it requires a transfer!! not sure if i can handle that.
40 minutes, ok ok.
ugh i am putting so much effort into this friendship.
is that a long drive for you though? to get to metropark.
hao.
????????????????????
lol.
CRABBING?? APPLE PICKING?!?!?! THIS SOUNDS AWESOME!!!!
NAVID??!?!!? EVEN MORE AWESOME.
that sounds like the beginning of a song.
can we do at least one of those?
oh yeah haha.
hao, hao.
either way.
what does crabbing entail?
...
by ourselves?
har har.
yeah that would be fun but crabbing/ strawberry picking sounds more exciting.
dis looks fun http://funbeach.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/CRABBING.jpg.
i think i wanna take french next year.
ha wait how?
alsoooo which are we doing? strawberries? crabs? crabby strawberries.
straw-y crabberries.
maybe crabapples, are those in season?
does she? wow i totally forgot that part.
omg you're so far already!!!
ugh stop i started middlemarch and i'm only 15 pages in :'( on the other hand, i have consumed The Iron Ring by Lloyd Alexander along with the first 100 pages of The Sign of the Beaver so I think we're pretty much even in terms of productivity.
she said yes, geez what more do you want.
wait but french would mean 6 classes :'( my gpa would suffer.
holy crap religious people are weird.
ok what day do you want to make this shindig anyhow.
TALK TO MEEEEEE.
oh they're just weird when they post on fb.
can we make it thursday actually? or friday.
stay oooverrr?
idk.
don't tell me "we can copulate silently".
but really daway we must never ever date. or do anything that would put this friendship in jeopardy.
exhibit a https://www.facebook.com/notes/david-chesley/freedom-in-christ/318321571632141.
hao.
??? bummer.
