also.
i haven't been accepted yet to the program.
i missed the deadline.
so i'd have to submit my sample with the incoming freshmen, which is the late deadline.
so there's not even a guarantee that i would get a spot in the class i wanted.
-_-
if that were the only reason, i would've taken 312.
you should be.
hao.
god i really need to pack.
ooh really?
i've used this face too many times in this conversation -_-
ok but shanks.
why isn't she.
maybe that's just the way she is.
maybe she has a tumor pressing on her brain.
and it's making her too happy.
because you feel pressured to be happy and crazy when you're with her?
have you tried?
Daway Choke-RenFriday, May 24, 2013 at 2:39am CDT.
about what?
it's fine.
i'm feeling content.
and cat-like.
i talk about my life too.
i like hearing about your life.
would you prefer i talked about my life more.
why?
i'm a good listener.
most prostitutes are.
i mean i'm a pretty private person generally.
make me go pack.
i'm literally the laziest person in the world.
no self-discipline.
mmm don't really know.
ordering books.
reddit.
listening to music.
checking blackboard.
did you see the king arthur presentations weren't actually graded? they were just a check.
lollllllll.
haha why?
:/.
she probably just didn't want to give out too many A's. i don't think the extra sentence actually was the deciding factor. she would have found something else wrong.
ugh that sucks.
wait are you coming back for reunions?
well you can just get them then, right?
i think you'll survive.
wait what happens at reunions? i don't get it.
what do you do.
are there events.
oh.
hao.
ha maybe.
did not look at the archives.
hah.
"Yo".
also i've been talking to you.
another reason i haven't been packing.
why aren't you yelling at me.
how late are you staying up?
i actually love this picture https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10151476670592075&set=pcb.10151476689482075&type=1&theater.
YOU LITERALLY HAVE NOT SLEPT THE PAST 4 DAYS!!!!
ok i'm going to pack.
will report back when progress has been made.
NOO.
ok kelsey dennison isn't that unattractive, but i think i was turned off from her personality because the first time i met her was at a pregame and she was taking selfies like there was no tomorrow and she kept asking me to take pictures of her and her friends and i was like "i don't even know you...".
tell me reina isn't pretty https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10151286574951412&set=pb.598336411.-2207520000.1369384556.&type=3&theater.
IT IS NOT SUNRISE YET.
if you go to lunch with davy/eddie/james tomorrow, ????
can you suggest some more music for me.
i love pictures at an exhibition!!!
wait this version is so weird.
Vivaldi's 4 Seasons.
Copeland: Appalachian Spring.
*Copland: Rodeo.
Copland: Billy the Kid.
i like copland.
Jaan Raeaets: 24 Marginalien Fuer Zwei Klavier.
Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker Suite.
if you're a bird i'm a bird!!!!!!
Debussy: Arabesque No. 1, L'Isle Joyeuse, Prelude to the Afternoon of a Fawn.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dL0JLNt_3EE.
fucking bosssss.
this will blow your mind http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ctr0CxnzCw.
notoriously difficult piece.
ugh can you hold on one second.
it's great.
got a chance to hang out with my real friends for once.
no i never did.
it'd be a huge project.
i think i could but it would take a lot of work.
not as well as he does.
it's extremely difficult.
even he doesn't get all the notes right.
on those big jumps.
mmm usually muscle memory lasts a long time.
i can still half-play my pieces from last year and i haven't practiced them at all.
hahaha yeah i know right.
the best part is the sweat dripping off his nose.
