Hannah HirshFriday, June 7, 2013 at 1:11am CDT.
cheesin hard.
my brain is so fried from all this quantum.
do you understand this? http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/waves/waveq.html#c1.
you're ridic.
it's going to be like 6 am before you go to bed.
EXPLAIN.
nope.
lolol.
oh wait.
yeah i do.
urgghh but i don't get the wave equation.
d^2y/dx^2.
the second derivative of y with respect to x?
but like.
what is that in real terms.
ok sorry yeah go take your nap.
yeah but why -_-
ok i mean only if you want to.
bedtime for bonzo.
catch ya on the flipside.
ugh nevermind i forgot i had to pack all my stuff for the wedding.
aww which album's getting the axe.
i wonder if my parents have heard this song. i like it.
yojimbo is the one you'd recommend?
well that was very rude she was a brilliant woman!
this song is very odd.
oh i'm starting to like it though.
never seen fistful of dollars.
the second song was weird but good.
"If I had to recommend a Kurosawa film to someone who's never seen one before (and might be impatient to sit through the three and a half hour Seven Samurai, or might not get the non-linear structure of Rashomon), I'd put this one in their hands to try out.".
that implies you weren't recommending rashomon.
oh yeah punctuation should've tipped me off.
oh i see.
HAVE YOU NEVER HEARD OF QUOTATION MARKS.
it was really fun actually.
THAT WAS THE SONG I WAS TALKING ABOUT ARE YOU RETARDED.
then i wouldn't say that obviously.
by the way.
my dad went completely mental on friday.
right before we left for the wedding.
i don't know if you wanna hear the whole thing.
but he freaked the fuck out about china and travel expenses and planning.
and he actually cursed me out.
do you know what that's like?
it was scary and i'm still so angry at him.
i mean he didn't say "fuck you".
so i guess didn't curse me out technically.
CAN YOU LET ME TALK.
stop stop no i'm not in a joking mood.
but he was like.
mm what did i say.
he was asking for the itinerary.
and i was like "why do guys need to know where i am in china? if something happens while i'm there i would obviously tell you where i was so there's no point in knowing ahead of time".
and he was like.
"are you kidding me? that has got to be the DUMBEST THING I'VE EVER HEARD.".
"if something happens to you in china, WHAT YOU THINK WE'RE GOING TO JUST SIT HERE? WE'RE GOING TO GO TO CHINA AND HAUL YOUR ASS BACK HERE.".
his face was getting all red, his voice was rising to a crescendo.
AND YOU'D BETTER CHANGE YOUR ATTITUDE HANNAH OR YOU'RE NOT GOING, I'M SERIOUS.
I HAVE NEVER SEEN SOMEONE SO FUCKING CLUELESS.
-cue mom entering the room-
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO FUCKING PENNSYLVANIA, YOU KNOW.
me, trying not to cry: yes, i realize that, thank you.
cue 8 hours of the most miserable drive of my life.
i don't know what caused it. he's been really ornery lately.
anyway. can you give me the username and password of the couchsurfing account you created so i can do that.
haha oh yeah your textbooks.
umm yeah i should be.
sure.
but see my dad's not usually like that at all. which is why it was so scary. i don't want you to think he's a bad person.
anyway.
send me the info pleas.
e.
couchsurfing.
why can't you send it now?
sure.
why would that be embarrassing.
w/e yeah just call me or something.
or message me first.
idk if i remember my password.
maybe.
no.
did you check the actual prices for plane tickets or was that just an estimate?
yeah.
ok.
ok, my dad demanded an estimate by tonight, so it's fine. i'll just give him what we have.
thanks for all the research you've been doing.
food.
i forgot we had to eat.
i'm so fucking scared of him right now.
he's being.
no i was thinking of the word.
waspish.
ha.
that wasn't funny.
and he hasn't apologized yet!
am i crazy, or am i owed at least a grudging apology?
has your mom ever cursed at you probably not.
you shouldn't laugh at your mom!
all right not that i should be giving out advice about filial relationships.
