i hope he appreciates this.
ooooh shoot you know i bet he'll write back with something like "at least i don't have poop in my hair".
i need a witty response for that.
omg wait i just remembered arrested development is out.
yussss.
have you watched yet??! you should do that!!
absolutely not hahah.
i'll probably watch a few episodes later today.
get on my sleep schedule.
get on my level.
i do, it involves sleep deprivation and lots of physics problems!!
oh wait.........
that's not fun at all.
-____________-
????,??
you know what i was thinking? having a thorough knowledge of music would be really useful for scoring a movie.
not just useful, more like critical.
ugh ok not for scoring.
ugh you're annoying.
just for directing.
i mean if i were directing a movie, i'd want to be in charge of the score.
because it's so important for communicating your message.
or getting your audience to feel a certain way.
........
how is that doing it wrong.
oh i see what you're saying.
no.
yes.
no.
ok yes disagree.
sound is crucial to the effect a scene has.
what director would trust a scorer to supply the emotion?
but you agree that an incompetent scorer could completely screw up a scene.
and the director would have to be able to recognize.
that the music wasn't working.
i.e., he would need to have a working knowledge of music.
i guess we have different opinions then.
haven't you ever listened to a piece of music and thought, "wow, i know exactly the kind of music scene i would set this to"?
sorry, "exactly the kind of film scene".
so that's an example of going into a scene, relying on sound to create the effect.
i'm not saying you need to know cadences and modulations.
i just think you need to have listened to a LOT of music.
i don't think one is better than the other.
you do whichever idea comes to you first.
if you have a movie.
and you want to evoke a certain feeling.
and you know a piece of music that would evoke that feeling.
then you structure the scene around it.
why not? why would that be a problem?
do you think it's relying too much on somebody else's creation?
hmm.
elaborate.
yeah.
i think it could actually help you direct by giving you a set of constraints.
so it gives your scene more structure.
easier to make decisions about editing.
if you had a very particular vision for the way you wanted to cut a scene already, of course you wouldn't choose a piece of music that would interfere with that vision.
but i don't think you necessarily need to have a particular vision.
in order to be an effective director.
WHAT IF THE DIRECTOR AND COMPOSER ARE WORKING TOGETHER.
WHY DOES THE COMPOSER HAVE TO COME IN AND CONSTRAIN HIS MUSIC TO THE DIRECTOR'S WHIMS, HUH???
WHY DOES NOBODY THINK OF THE COMPOSER!!!
GOD!!!
well i'm going to start making motion MUSIC and set movies to it.
sorry, fell asleep for a few minutes there.
take your pick.
wait the image is self generating?
that would imply that the music and the painting combinations are supposed to be different each time.
so the video is really only one of an infinite number of possibilities.
did you read the paragraph you just copy pasted.
yes.
haha wtf.
can you stop trivializing everything i say.
I HATE PEOPLE WHO NON-IRONICALLY USE HASHTAGS ON FACEBOOK.
holy shit i hate you.
i can't even look at my newsfeed now because it keeps popping up.
friendship terminated.
oh good call.
hahaha i already untagged myself though.
ugh how is it STILL our friendship photo?!!
isn't that supposed to be only tagged pictures of both of us...
fgklm.
ugh ok i kind of hate you but also i can't help laughing every time i look at it.
my only comfort is that you look that bad in all the pictures we take.
sucks to suck.
hahahaha.
ha.
http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=sucks+to+suck.
pretty sure you don't have a monopoly on this one.
i've done this before, but i can do it again if you want.
actually i kinda want to do it again.
idk.
i thought maybe you left your computer.
I GOT A 33.
SUCK IT.
sucks to........... slurp.
slurps to slurp.
i'm going to start saying that.
my browser isn't displaying the chart with the distribution of scores :(.
could you see it?
