to contribute to our understanding of the natural laws that govern our world.
i want to write or tell stories or do something that touches people.
that would give me more satisfaction than making a scientific discovery.
and thinking about these things it seems so plain that i should just ditch chemistry.
but i'm scared, i guess, of failing at something i love so much and think is so important.
and i also have other thoughts.
like what my parents want, what my peers expect, how a science major is viewed versus an english major or something.
because i *could* do science.
if i really wanted.
i could be a chem major, and not a terrible one either.
but i don't know...
i mean.
take chekhov.
he was a doctor, first and foremost.
he did the sciences and went to medical school and was a full-time physician.
and yet he was one of the most celebrated authors in history.
so like.
not necessarily, but i want to feel that what i'm doing is worthwhile.
as in...
touching on something universal and truthful about the human condition.
yeah.
i mean i guess the only way i would know i had written something worthwhile was if people responded to it.
why do you ask about impacting others.
haha.
well isn't that what it is for you?
great physics discovery or bust.
LIFE SUCCCKKKKS.
i give up.
i give up life.
mm you would have received a brochure from deep springs, right? they send them out to the 14,000 highest male scorers on the SAT.
DAMMIT I WOULD HAVE GOTTEN ONE.
it probably varies.
is it a bad thing to want to be recognized for your work?
i feel like that's a stupid way to live.
trying to weigh the odds and determine what career path will give me the best chance at being honored in years to come.
ugh but i do want to do something worthwhile.
so maybe it's not.
how else do you know if you've done something worthwhile?
no but really.
that's an honest question.
yeah that's true.
that there isn't really that much you can do besides work your hardest and hope it pays off.
ugh i mean that's easy to say theoretically but realistically can you find satisfaction in that?
external validation is always a nice bonus.
if you think you could have then why aren't you doing physics.
asking big questions here.
if you do physics i'll do writing, deal?
no no better.
we'll run an experiment.
you live the safe life doing cos.
i'll do writing.
at the end we compare lives and decide who fared better.
:/.
donate all your money to charity.
do it the peter singer way.
so mean.
he built 5 generations?
what does that mean.
i don't know. i would call it a true life and a virtuous and an admirable.
but i don't know if i would call it meaningful.
well yeah to himself it is!
but... come on.
don't you want to feel like you mattered to somebody besides yourself?
being honest to yourself?
trying to answer what honestly?
there's always the "right place, right time component.
close quotes after time.
where were we going with this, again?
oh so if we conclude that it's not important to be recognized with others.
and all that matters is embracing the challenges we face and doing the best we can.
is the conclusion that it doesn't matter what we go into at all?
man you are going to get very little sleep.
maybe it's time to just stay up and complete the cycle.
haha.
no promises.
woah calm down.
answer my question.
haha.
no, not really. why?
m yeah.
no but thank for looking out for me BY POINTING OUT THAT NOBODY WILL EVER THINK ANYTHING I DO IS WORTHWHILE AND BELIEVING OTHERWISE IS SETTING MYSELF UP FOR A LIFE OF UNHAPPINESS.
*LIFETIME.
i don't know, i've never had to go without it.
wait but are you trying to say that working hard at being a physics major = working hard at being a cos major? i.e., you will derive the same life satisfaction from either path?
chekhov was quite good-looking.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anton_P_Chekhov.jpg.
then doesn't your argument not hold.
about working hard/ embracing challenges being the thing that matters.
we should just talk more about this tomorrow.
tomorrow, tomorrow.
i want to learn to dance.
they should have an emoticon that conveys "wry smile".
lul seems too lighthearted.
lul.
lul.
hao.
ok let's talk more tomorrow.
we both should sleep.
gnight gnight gnight.
may your dreams be full of dwarf lemurs.
