hey i wonder if we could get some chinese characters in the word cloud.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X7mOzWQSnaQ.
omg 0:08-0:20 is the best part.
where the one on the right is like... what... what is happening O.o.
and then he's like lol it's cool giggle giggle giggle.
god so adorable.
oh ok.
yeah kinda is.
doesn't matter anyway though 'cause i'm not tall and aryan.
???????
hao :).
lolol all my youtube ads are for msmr's new album now.
AND ADS IN CHINESE!!! THEY KNOW.
if you invite a girl to stay over at your house.
that's not really something you do with normal friends.
do you want to talk in person? or like on the phone or something.
-_-
i wasn't sure. i was trying to give you an out in case you didn't want to admit it.
or in case i was wrong.
yeah. it's just... losing our friendship would suck a lot.
also.
hm.
i guess it was that whenever i would declaim that we weren't together (to eddie, for example), you wouldn't say anything to back it up.
remember when eddie was like "oh, cat costume, kinky," and i was like "no this is not a thing" ?
"??????".
i had an inkling.
sorry, should i have said something sooner?
i didn't want you to be all "god ?? obviously i don't like you, you're so conceited blah blah".
so.
wait.
i have a question.
remember when i was like "btw i'm dating someone now. darwin wanted me to tell you" .. did you like me then?
ok ok, dass good.
haha what why?
oh god nooooo hahahaha.
god that is just awful.
but pretty funny.
so.
for how long then?
i guess it doesn't matter, you don't really have to tell me.
what i'm shocked.
you mean you didn't make note of it in your diary.
ha ha ha ha ha.
i know!!
wait.
what is.
i was just going to say that it was good i was dating darwin at the time, otherwise this beautiful friendship might not have developed.
i'm actually not sure what the logic of that statement was.
lolol.
what were you going to say before?
i have been eating honey straight from the jar for 30 minutes.
"this is why we're friends actually".
ha ha ha ugh it's not that difficult!!!
"me wanted".
you do wonder what? STOP LEAVING OFF IN THE MIDDLE OF SENTENCES.
how come i was convinced?
i wasn't, but i thought it would seem conceited if i appeared to think you liked me.
dammit, i just dropped my spoon!
now i have to get a new one.......
ugh.
why were you confused?
maybe i secretly thought you were gay.
you are in a domestic partnership with navid, after all.
but no, see above explanation^^.
hahaha.
you'll be fine, i hear zhongguo girls have really low self-esteem.
HAHA jk jk.
too soon?
oh so you're like lindsay? girls with high self-esteem?
right right.
from ad duhhh.
when she protests against zach braff, i forget his character's name.
ok, well we'll find you some self-confident, tall, short-haired, white girl in the PiB program.
or just on the streets, you know, whatever.
as long as you're not picky.
knew that was coming.
i set you up for that.
you're welcome.
ugh past tense, you're over me already? so fickle with your affections.
ha ha that's better.
YES i'd love to but i thought you already used up your one cry per year???
"a child's tears! i'll bottle them and sell them on the internet!".
haha ugh.
go to 14:50 for the context of the above quote http://www.watchcartoononline.com/the-fairly-oddparents-season-3-episode-15-miss-dimmsdale-mind-over-magic.
well you don't have to!! but if you want to understand my high culture references.
ha yes.
because darwin was the half because things were rough but i didn't want you to question why he was only half because i didn't want to talk about it.
things are better now that we're not together. so now i have 3 full friends (at princeton).
ma bud maggie.
oh yeah.
he... ugh this is better explained in person.
you want it now?
it's just long.
ughhuu.
there were just things i thought worked better when we were friends than when we were in a relationship. like we poked fun at each other a lot when we were friends but then we were dating suddenly it was like he took things a lot more personally. he was very jealous, of you in particular, which made me feel like he didn't trust me. and he got sulky when we didn't spend enough time together, which was annoying. and i could tell he was mad even if he didn't say it. i'd be like "sorry i'm having dinner with friends" and he'd just respond with "k.".
also there were times when he would give unsolicited advice about how i should be living my life and it came off as so condescending and patronizing. like the week or so before finals i really wanted to study for orgo but karen was having people over and she wanted me to come. and i was like "karen i'd love to come but i have to study." and she was like it's fine, it's fine, just come, you can just eat dinner with us and then study as much as you want. so i brought my stuff and then darwin messaged me on gmail chat and was like what's up and i was like not much and he was like what are you guys up to and i was like i'm studying for orgo, but i think the others are watching a movie. and he was like "what? you're not hanging out with your friends? you're not going to be invited places again if you keep doing that." and i was just like wtf who are you.
and so i told him that i was annoyed and that i didn't need him telling me what to do and that my friends liked me the way i was and he texted me back saying "read what you just wrote to me. that's literally the meanest thing you ever said to me. i know you're stressed but the least you could do is say it nicely.".
and i was like wtf you literally just turned all the blame on me and also why should i not be angry with you? why should i not be allowed to tell you how i feel, just because we're dating? is that what dating is to you, bottling in your anger? if i'm pissed i'll tell you i'm pissed.
yeah you did.
yeah.
