go buy more Steam games.
why is this in black and white.
Why are you on gizmodo.
What editing software did you use here? Bee I'm impressed with those Z's.
Ain't got nothing on mike.
Go home fiz you're drunk.
aw thanks dad  they're kidding.
oh totally forgot, will do.
Man this is what the Voice was about when we liked it before everyone else started watching it.
i guess you didn't get it.
unlisted still. only people who click on the link from here can get there. 
also, to whoever downvoted it:
I don't. They literally open the closed computer and go in.
I don't like you.
I don't think I've actually made a status in a year.
darsh why isn't this your prof pic yet.
No problem pool boy.
That's why we have those episodes where they switch roles.
you get klout notifications from me?
why are you so elusive on linkedin, darshan.
also way to respond with when you're getting back.
oh...yeah about that.
also, change your profile picture dear god.
look at that seductive stare.
You should watch suits, dude. great show.
You picked the wrong freshmen sem.
this is too good.
Charlie Jacobson too much of a poon to watch it.
i dreamt of jesoprah.
christ almighty.
Someone teach my brother to smile.
The one takeaway everyone needs to remember is that correlation ALWAYS implies causation. Props to Facebook Data Science for this great note.
Thai curry for dinner, real Curry for dessert.
Joe and Ed didn't quite make the cut.
Delicious sushi.. What can't she do?
Happy Mother's Day, Mom!
credit to Arthur Imperatore for making somewhat believable statuses.
Chris Bosh can code. Better get started now everyone.
Everyone crowded around ray lewis must have felt awkward..I definitely just saw some buttcrack.
I don't like Piers Morgan too much, but this guy.. This guy.
Sparky is confused as to why there's a giant fatty stealing his spot.
The love of my life... And Sarah.
She got "We're Just Friends"...
Home sweet home.
Eric have a good break sorry about that last fifa game.
Did my professor really just take out two bottles of wine for our last day of glass.
Observing and filming James and Alex while they watch A Serbian Film. Look up the synopsis if you dare (seriously don't).
if you got a poke from me, just stop.