I don't mind his bragging and gloating. To me, he recognizes the importance of his home and places it higher in his choice, that's enough.
Free cup cake @ 1 pm. But didn't wait for it.
Tzuchi Ju this is the best garden I've visited in the recent years. Have you been here? It's close to your house.
Sree Kaka did you really just write Chinese to me.
Anne is my brother's daughter. Today is her birthday. Luckily it's not on the same day of the class reunion so I was able to celebrate with her after meeting some friends at Taipei.
Alana Egan, WE LOVE YOU!! Happy Birthday, my beautiful girl!!
it makes my day! Mark likes it when I appreciate old friends!
but I really don't mind people know my age as long as I have my health
A friend from my middle school joined NTU1984 (NTU1984 is a close facebook group). Then through her facebook profile, I saw some familiar names. Most of all, I found the ringleader who already have a collection of our high school classmates. I am mostly grateful that they didn't forget about me.
Jennifer, thank you! I think they make me so happy. And when you are happy, it makes everything much easier.
Tzuchi Ju Did you come when I was at Purdue? I know you visited when I was at MA, and what a host I was - I let you read my for days! Boys! You should come visiting more!
Haha. Just to take the pictures on the beautiful wintery scene without slow down or blocking the traffic.
chungshu, there is a famous Oyster eating contest at Princeton tomorrow (2/2) at noon. Do you want to come?
This is a treat from my daughter on the famous Blue Point Grill. The little wooden stick labels the oyster. Very fresh and delicious.
on 6/7. i told my classmates that i will go. you?
Wendy, we sold the house. The picture was taken after the new owner dug out all the bushes in front of the house, rhododendron, Japaneses maples.....
ok, i might become a LeBron fan now.
A full day of festivities with parade, music and food @ Philadelphia Museum of the Art.
name tags: couple hours; a feast for thousands: couple months; to make it all happen: a 30-Year wait. 
I had a great time with my college friends.
A good night sleep, plus two movies == the distance from Taiwan to US.
"life is a lively process of becoming" - to GIOM and ASOC.
this picture was taken 17 years ago, and my high school graduation was almost 34 years ago. Oh My! 
Something really wonderful happened in the last 24 hours: I re-connected with 9 high school classmates!!! Their names and faces bring back so much joys!
What a great Winter Olympics Opening show!
On the way to work. This is the time I wish I have google glasses!
can't believe this happened!
Wow, I really like the "instant onboard image post-processing" - "on demand focus". The OneWheel is cool, but not sure how do they handle the up-hill.
wow, today is a perfect day to try this - sunny and bitterly cold. Maybe the wind can still blow the bubble away.
One of the best ways to start a New Year by spending time with friends.
For my dearest brother, you are the best!
Anchi Lin, Happy Birthday, my friend.
First turkey at Princeton. Followed NYTimes's receipt.
amazing and satisfying series!
a place we called home for 8+ years.
NYTimes' sports writer wrote a better piece on last night's game. But as a Red Sox fan, this game did bring back the memories of 2004.
.