Happy birthday Safiyah girl  Suhoor candles and cake, indian dinner in Austin, and put put
Stumbled across this in a scientific journal...clever joke or serious oversight???
Taking my favorite pretty lady president out for dinner! I love you Mara, and though I probably won't see you at Wellesley any more, I will always be thinking of you. You inspire me every day with your strength, heart, and kindness - it's hard to put into words what a beautiful soul you are! And, of course, your sass and secret potty humor make you truly mara-velous. I can't wait to see the amazing things you will do and the policies you will enact as the future Mme POTUS.
Perfect weekend
Kate, am only now realizing that we are tagged as the goslings...smart move bussert, smart move
Come buy clementines at El Table to support Veronica Yu's work with health and wellness NGOs and sustainability projects in Peru!! Each clementine you buy goes toward helping Vron's projects as well as your own personal happiness due to increased amounts of yummy clementines
Cute lil snug bugs in the #marmon scream tunnel
The best people in the world (missing mama Micaela Palermo) 
Apply to el table
Real tears shed....CHANCE THE RAPPER IS COMING TO WELLESLEY
Emma vs book 
Warm fuzzy love to everyone at 24 hour shakes
Welcome home Levea Freeman....we love you so!!
Walden walden walden
A big big THANK YOU to Leigh Morrison for making me my first ever pair of SWANTS! What are swants you ask?? Only a sweater that has been made by fabric magic into PANTS, aka the most comfy and amazing garment I have ever had the privilege of wearing. Why should torsos have the monopoly on sweaters?? DOESN'T MAKE SENSE! Leigh, thank you so much for these bday swants, they are perfect and I expect to wear them till kingdom come. I already miss you so much and hope you have the adventure of a lifetime in Amsterdam!! LOVE YOU LEIGH
WHO SENT ME A MATTRESS PROTECTOR FROM AMAZON is this some sort of sick joke/suggestion???? I am so confused help me
Thank you everyone for the best birthday a gal could ask for. 40 aint so bad!
Wonderful first day with the perfect cast of steel magnolias
Leigh-zard fleece + Lil-zard fleece
For christmas this year I want a smaller cuter version of me