
      Mitt Romney is the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, and, like any major party presidential nominee, he has spent millions of dollars on political advertisements, all aimed to get him votes. One such advertisement, titled “Believe in America”, exemplifies multiple aspects frequently found in political commercials. 
      Early on in the ad, the target audience quickly becomes apparent. This commercial has been aimed at the middle class home and business owners who are not satisfied with Barack Obama’s efforts to repair our ailing economy. The advertisement makes its audience clear by beginning the commercial with President Obama making a speech before his election, in which he talks about relief for the middle class, for homeowners, and for the economy. While Obama is heard making these promises, the advertisement screen shows text showing Obama’s promised relief for these people and the economy never came.
      About a third through the video, Mitt Romney’s voice comes through and he is speaking about a “smaller, simpler, and smarter” approach to government (“getting rid of programs, turning programs back to states” and “making government itself more efficient”). He sgiws his solutions to the previously characterized failures of Obama, and then goes on to speak in the urgent tone on the ongoing damage Obama’s actions are causing such as “killing jobs” and “keeping our kids from having the bright prospects they deserve”. He then promises to repair this damage, but continues to press the viewer for immediate support to stop more damage from being done. 
      Another interesting thing to explore in this ad would be the background music and the visual/optical effects. Analyzing the differences in these aspects at different parts of the video would enhance our understanding of what each part of the video is trying to convey in the viewer.
      “Believe in America” is a very stereotypical political commercial that describes the failures of Romney’s opponent and the urgency of the problems caused by this opponent while promising reparations if Romney is elected..
