well it sucks that you go to princeton then.
bc the workplace isn't going to make special exceptions for you.
it's 3.5 or nothing.
you should be trying to do as well as you can.
instead of settling for above average.
am i supposed to be impressed by that?
whoa you're above the bottom 30% of your class.
whoa.
daway, 30% of your class are probably dumb.
certainly here, i feel like 30% of the kids are dumb.
compete with the best, not with teh worst.
ok.
stop making excuses.
you're making excuses for your mediocrity.
ugh whatever.
ok.
why so snarky?
hard at work?
are you on your laptop or desktop?
why don't you come downstairs. mom and i are both on our laptops at the kitcehn table.
I won't have an extra ticket anymore--both my friends are going. If you want to go though there are still tickets available, though they aren't cheap ($60). Concert's in Englewood too. http://www.ticketmaster.com/event/0000495ACF1DF709?wt.mc_id=aff_BUYAT_73074&camefrom=CFC_BUYAT_73074.
when did she say she possibly wouldnt?
she didn't tell me that.
why?
that's a lie.
mom's getting cold feet bc she's sad to leave us.
i can see how that's really painful.
but i also feel like she shouldn't let that keep her from achieving things for HER life.
but of course it's her choice.
whatever makes her happy.
is your paper done?
absolutely.
evan loves meeting new people.
but seriously, paper first.
emily doesn't like evan.
and evan doesn't like emily.
and also, i don't really like evan's pton friends.
at least the girl who's suite this party will be in.
and evan throws a couple parties at pton every year, so i'm sure you can go another time.
(just saying this isn't your only chance so don't prioritize it for that reason).
i had dinner with remi and a bunch of her pton friends last year.
it was excruciating.
remi is really flirtatious.
not in a charming way though.
she just acts like a meek girl.
like really girly.
and evan is actually one of my really good friends at school.
he speaks like 9 languages.
he went to a really ghetto hs in florida.
where there were multiple fatal stabbings in teh hs every year.
i think i've told you that story.
he's really into music, languages.
traveling.
spent this past summer in nepal, rio, and paris.
summer before that was in mauritius.
summer before that was in china.
subversively teaching kids about tiananmen square.
he's really interesting.
but he can also be a little childish and over the top.
overall, he's a very earnest person though.
emily doesn't like him bc he's extremely blunt.
he doesn't like emily bc emily's hardcore catholic, and he just isn't really into religion.
evan's very good at bringing people together.
his parties at columbia are always full of interesting ppl.
idk about pton though.
(mainly bc i didn't like remi or the other pton kids i met).
so go if you have time, feel free to bring friends, but i can't actually vouch for the party.
at columbia usually there's like 50-100 ppl at these things.
i see that only 18 responded at pton.
so your odds are weirder.
anyway, what do you think of mom not going to china?
really?
i care a lot.
well make sure she knows that.
so unemotional.
yeah well emotions should also be emotional.
that sounds really unhealthy.
bc it means you're uncomfortable showing emotion.
so that's not always good in relationships.
you should be able to share happy as well as sad.
well you should also trust people enough to be able to be vulnerable around them.
of course there's right moments and wrong ones.
sup.
jcjc.
just chilling just chilling.
jk i'm doing homework.
your cover pic is so lame.
you should change it to this.
http://2.asset.soup.io/asset/3838/8850_e9af.jpeg.
i'm slowly changing everything in my life to that picture.
like i'm grooming my face so i look like that monkey.
got tattoos of it all over my arms.
etc.
you know.
do it.
basketballs stupid.
monkey cute.
or at least make it fenway.
this is also cute.
http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-6XHSDmQg3us/Tc5brguYSNI/AAAAAAAAVuQ/itSi1daj7m8/s400/NAPERVILLE%2BELEPHANT.jpg.
