Idk it's up to you.
I doubt mom will take work off since she just went on vacation.
Btw I'm commuting from pton all next week.
Bc. I don't move into my apt until the 15.
Idk I'm split. On one hand it's an atrocity and I support action. On the other hand, I haven't read of any plans that make any sense. I don't like the idea of limited strikes that much. I mostly feel like there will be no good solution and this is lose-lose for everyone. What about you?
Yeah. I have more thoughts which ill discuss later bc I'm at lunch. Also you return in two days.
Do you like this?
It was ok.
http://allwet.bandcamp.com/track/youre-the-best.
:(.
Hm weird. I had a tab from that batch and it was fine for me. Maybe it got exposed? Sorry to hear that though.
Idk.
I can probably get you more some time. I've never froze it btw.
Just made me angry at how unmindful my life was.
But it was still hopeful.
No that I waste a lot of time and money.
Part of the crowd, without thinking constantly about the effects of humans on the world and each other.
That's the takeaway you get from this article?
That's great.
I've been waiting to hear how bicker went.
:(.
Don't take it too seriously.
You've gotten really hyped up about a really artificial process that won't really impact the quality of your life in the long run.
what?
like as a thank you?
do you go to his office hours?
and why develop a relationship? for more recs?
I've never asked a professor to lunch but it's totally fine if you do.
i'm not sure exactly how to go about doing it, but i can ask around a little.
https://www.princeton.edu/campuslife/funding/phdprogram/.
what about this thing?
where?
haha.
I'm going to assateauge over memorial day.
unless we all end up going to taiwan.
I'm going to New Orleans in two weekends.
haven't told mom yet.
wheres glacier national park?
I'm just going for the weekend.
to where?
oh.
i really wanted to go to smoky mts for spring break.
but a lot of the cool lodging doesn't seem to open until april.
assateague is great.
but more of a summer place i think.
i'm not sure.
when i went i stayed in a person's house off island.
who are you going with and for how long?
who's davy perlman?
sounds like an intimate trip.
ok thanks, I don't think I need any soon though, plus I can get it here too.
why did you splinter?
yeah.
cool. just you three?
?
oh.
who are the other 5?
and that's good right - single?
who's tyler?
from china.
ok cool.
anyway i have to sleep now.
bc of daylight savings.
bye.
So are you not going to Taiwan this summer?
hmm.
btw have you read jaron lanier?
he has two books - you are not a gadget, and who owns the future. You should read both.
or at least try to find some videos of him talking online. he's a legend in the computing world and i think he's really concerned about interesting issues.
i think it's great you're building programming and compsci skills.
but you really have to seize the right opportunities and push yourself to be involved in the right fields.
it's a huge waste to work for a place like nokia.
tech is gross in general.
unless you have the right motivations.
so read jaron lanier.
that seems pretty indulgent.
what attitude?
i went to a talk by jaron lanier on friday where he spoke about how the rise of digital networks is eroding our middle class, economy, and social fabric.
i think tech is awesome.
but i think a lot of people forget why they went into it.
and even those with good intentions, get distracted and lose the bigger picture.
you should be reading jaron lanier immediatley before you pick an internship.
before you apply for an internship.
you can be one of 8 bajillion people who try to become rich, indulgent techies.
or you can use your skills to do something really meaningly.
*meaningful.
and socially responsible.
that's what everyone wants to do.
Daway, just go borrow his books now.
and start reading, and then talk to me.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/06/books/who-owns-the-future-by-jaron-lanier.html.
start with who owns the future. it's more current.
yeah i think it is.
unless you are actualyl doing something practical, like learning how to make films.
otherwise it's a huge indulgence.
you should focus on cos.
get an east asian or hum certificate bc humanities is worthwhile and extremely important.
but youshouldn't be getting three certificates.
and i'd recommend just getting the hum one anyway.
you need to be more responsible than that.
