i feel like king arthur can be kind of a soft subject.
it's not hard history.
so prob not very rigorous.
yeah but it's not purely lit either.
its in the place btw both.
it's folklore.
which is bs history and bs lit.
but it could be good too.
ok i'm going. ttyl. good luck on chinese.
didn't like chvrches.
i don't remember what you're talking about re borges.
we're together though his family doesn't know. we're not staying together past graduation so it's not really anything.
? who are you?
%.
?
????????????
what do the little numbers next to the phone symbol on facebook chat mean?
like if it says 1m, does that mean the person has been away from their phone for 1 minute?
fine.
daway.
are you there?
urgent.
h/o.
can you give me a call on my phone?
need to test whether my phone can receive and make calls.
ok it doesn't work.
my phone doesn't work.
can you call mom.
and ask her to respond to my emails?
i'm in san fran now.
just had dropbox interviews.
they are calling me back this afternoon to let me know if i have to come back for second round tomorrow.
but since i'm switching over to iphone.
i think mom ported my number.
so now 7327404980 goes to the iphone.
which is in the package center at my school.
so now my phone that i have with me here, isn't connected to a number.
meaning i'm screwed.
can't make or receive calls.
and i need to be able to receive dropbox's call today.
i also am supposed to have a phone interview with google tonight or tomorrow.
so this is insanely bad bad bad.
well tell her to PLEASE contact verizon or att and try to figure out why i can't receive or make calls as of half an hour ago.
i would call them but i don't have a phone anymore.
can you ask her to go online?
why?
that's mean.
yes i didn't have reception. BUT it was weird because i was able to make calls from my room that morning and the night before, and was texting up until i walked into my room. so definitely weird.
bad.
idk.
h/o.
ugh.
so this whole trip has been terrible.
my interviews yesterady went fine.
and i was invited back for roudn two today.
supposed to have 3 interviews.
but two were canceled.
so i only had one.
and that went badly.
and then i had a dumb conversation with my recruiter.
and anyways, they are going to decide next tuesday if they want me to stay in the running.
and if yes (which is probably not going to happen), then i have to do a skype interview.
it just never ends.
also i'm more undecided by the compnay now.
it seems really socially competitive.
anyway.
i don't love those novels for your class.
i think the victorian novel is academically outdated.
like.
ok so dropbox gives you breakfast lunch and dinner.
two people work as bartenders full time.
it's "COOL" and the people who work there are "COOL".
aroudn lunch time.
they ring a gong to let everyone know the food's ready.
then people gather in the "Cafe" and sit at table.
tables.
in cliques.
the loners eat by themselves.
it's a little unnerving how much of a utopia it is in there.
like it's just not real.
and everyone is just so concerned with how smart and cool they are.
i liked some people i met.
i didn't like other people.
so it was kind of disillusioning.
also my trip has just been really unfun.
like everything's been going wrong.
like taxis getting lost.
and hotel accidentally checking me out.
yeah whatever.
i'm just in a bad mood.
bc i wanted interviews to be over today.
but now it's just even more drawn out.
i have a phone interview with google next friday too.
it's just a really stressful time.
and annoying bc i didn't like people so i'm not even excited about this anymore.
what.
when ar eyou guys coming tomorrow?
yeah.
idk.
the thing is from 930am til like 1230?
