don't psych yourself out.
i understand.
for 201?
so you're not doing well in 201 either?
whatever, remember sara chuang?
my old roommate.
she took multi freshman year here and got over 100 average.
I even took multi as a sophomore and i suck at math.
and i barely made it.
but it's not that worst thing in the world.
you sound like you're so psyched out.
who cares if 1 out of 8 kids from high tech took 203.
if you always let info like that direct your actions.
you'll never be a free actor.
i'm just making sure you are working hard.
daway, do you realize how naive you sound? 15 hours is not extraordinary.
it's irregular perhaps, but i've heard of much longer psets.
i support your switch to 201.
i'm just saying make sure you do well if you want a job.
i didn't care enough about my gpa and i think it's closing so many opportunities for me.
i also didn't take the right classes.
you have to be so careful.
so how did you do on your physics midterm?
were you above the mean?
ok.
whatever, you'll be fine. is there anything i can do to help?
are you coming home for fall break and when?
also what are you doing for winter break?
when?
and also you realize that fall break is the last time me you and mom will be in america together right.
so try to be home as much as you can.
i'm probs only going to be there saturday-mon bc i have work tuesday.
yeah, she's probably going to be in china before thanksgiving right.
also when are you going to taiwan? i'm probably going to go home for 10 days in december.
but then the day after new years i'm heading back to live in nyc to work fulltime at morgan.
but if you're not going to be home christmas week, i have to figure out what to do bc i don't want to be in the house by myself for a week.
yea.
wait i'm not going.
i only have a week off.
it's not worth it.
like by the time i adjust my jet lag i'll have to go back.
so basically i'll be in our house by myself for my winter break?
wait and how is your fall break like 10 days long.
ok well i'm going to be home from dec 22 to january 2.
whens intercession?
it's your second winter break.
yea you get a weeklong break between semseters.
january 26 to feb 4th it looks like.
but that's too short to go to taiwan.
i mean you should check, bc i obviously don't really know.
um i think if it's 3 quarters of a full page that's kind of the longest it should be.
idk what that translates to.
ok.
yo.
i need help.
pset day!!!!!
daway i need help.
just one problem.
estimate how long it will be until andromeda and the milky way crash into each other.
i know the answer should be 4 billion years.
i keep getting 2 billion.
only info you're given is that the blueshift of andromedia is -0.001.
and distance is 700kpc.
daway can you help?
whats the forumla for blueshift?
tha'ts unhelpful.
shai also couldn't help me.
he said that it's okay that my answer is half of what it should be.
i think he was lying.
i have the formula.
v=change in wavelength*c.
but that just leads to the wrong answer i think.
how do i find frequency from wavelength?
wait i'm going offline bc i have to avoid chatting w/ someone. can you go on gchat?
wait i forgot that i can still send you messages even if i'm not online.
are you home?
bye.
um idk.
maybe saturday.
i mean, saturday.
not sure how i'll get out of the city at this moment.
when are you going home?
until sunday?
yes.
are you even able to vote?
how old are you?
go home to vote.
i'm really stressed bc i still haven't gotten my absentee ballot.
you shouldn't have missed the absentee deadline.
and you have to vote.
iono.
8pm.
why?
or wait.
In New Jersey, any voter can now vote via Absentee Ballot for any election. You do not need to state a reason for an Absentee Ballot. A completed Application for Vote by Mail Ballot may be sent to the Monmouth County Clerk up to 7 days prior to the election by mail or delivered in person at the Monmouth County Clerk's Office until 3:00 p.m., the day before the election. The County Clerk cannot accept faxed copies of an Application for Vote by Mail Ballot. The forms are available at the Township Clerk’s office or may be downloaded here.
i think you can complete an application and deliver in person until day before?
am i reading that correctly?
who knows where the monmouth county clerks office is though.
ok.
find the hours.
