K. I love you.
did you finish your graphic project?
how about the REU documents they need
i don't want you to go to that trip
got all the parts?
k
so make sure financial aid done, and make sure the documents you need to send to REU done
I am going to bed now. I will go to office tomorrow, so after you done both financial aid (need proof) and REU (need proof), i will bring you the phone tomorrow after 7PM, more likely 7:30PM
I love you. Good night. make sure you have my W2 and the 1040 tax - it should be in your mailbox
Good night
Did you finish REU?
Your acct number is
Check ur gmail
need anything else for your REU documents? or other stuffs?
how are you , Dodo
DoDo, how you are ?
anything i can help?
Chou YonChun said no problem
he is lining you up with the best medical teaching university at Taiwan
huawei thing the timing is not good
timing is too short
your time is too short
entire 6 weeks at peru?
you cnnot do this
Chou yonchun has proceed to arrange it
you are kidding , right
you think all the arrangement doesn't need efforts?
and can come and go
i asked you should i ask chou yonchun to stop, you say no
you said he can continue
Daway!
Daway, i am too upset to continue this conversation wth you now
how are you, DoDo?
DoDo, How are you?
what are you doing ?
when are you going to move refrig etc home?
Ann had her bike in the trunk of the big car, i need your help to move it to the house first before i can use that big car to help you move back
ok
what are you doing now?
ok
are you going to NY?
Wednesday I can be home only after 7
Daway take lots of pictures w your iPhone. I want to show NTU to do the same.
Dodo
How r u?
Write me more email
Tell me your life there
Taiwan relatives want to know
Are those topics interested?
Dodo how r u? Write me more emails!
How r u? Give me some updates, please !
Tell me more.
K
Write to me !
Tell me more
Dodo
good
Who is your mentor?
Prof or graduate student?
Are you working hard and learning?
Food and sleep ok?
Eat healthy. Drink water. Don't be picky
Are you able to make progress in your proj?
K. Good. Are you learning a lot?
K. Focus and work hard. Make this count
Need anything? Anything I can help?
K. I love you
MySQL is easy. Yes What is your MySQL question? If you google your question, most likely internet has answers
K. How is everything? Making progress on research?
Tell me more.
Working or watching tv?
K
Do you have time write creat the website for me on reunion: everyone name is on the left side , click can display their page, just one page with the same real estate
If your configuration is correct
Or you can telnet to the server. Command line is very basic. No UI. Basic stuff can be run on many env. Client/ server setting is easier to use
Can you add a print statement to see if you reach to the server
Right the data should not store in your computer
U don't need to. But it's always good to know the very basic. It can help debug
Yes.
Dodo
How r u
Publish polish your website. Next years internship can use that as a show case
Dodo, how are you?
Tell me more. I miss you.
Give me details about your research. And tell me more about your daily routine.
Take some pictures of your lab, prof, colleagues, dorm....
Daway, Write to your mother!
Can you make an effort write some long emails or messages to me?
Treat it as your priority
It's very important to stay closed with your mom
Do u watch NBA?
Or work?
K. Spurs is auch better team
U have no reason not to write to me (w details).om is more important than nba
How about your prof/ REU proj
you being there. Discuss w prof. Ask and communicate
Tell me more
Please. I need to know details
Make the best out of the situation. Everything everyone had things for us to learn.
Don't forget to write. Tell me details.
