
      With his family’s savings of one hundred dollars neatly sewn into his shirt by his mother and a single travel bag full of dictionaries and clothes, my father arrived in America from China on a blustery September day in 1987. He planned to study computer engineering at the University of Illinois at Chicago. My mother immigrated to the United States exactly one year later on a student visa. Within a day, she had, like my father, flown in her first plane, rode in her first car, and eaten (and promptly vomited) her first Western meal – a slice of Chicago deep-dish pizza. From humble origins, my parents were able to, in thirty-some years, achieve tremendous upward mobility. My mother is now a doctor at the same school that gave her a full scholarship in 1988, and we live far away from the first house my parents could afford, a walkup in East Garfield Park with a shared bathroom and no heat. 
      However, this only tells half the story. How often is it that we structure immigration stories as narratives of entry? It is impossible to comprehensively explain the immigrant narrative by solely considering life in the host country. My parents’ early lives in China as well as their means of immigration heavily informed the trajectories of their lives. The individual sacrifices and decisions of my parents as well as the structurally significant history and politics surrounding their lives in China inextricably shaped the culture they brought with them to the US. 
      To fully unpack the structural factors of inequality at play in twentieth century China here would be, to be blunt, impossible. For the purpose of this paper, I will focus on the most significant events during my parents’ lifetimes, specifically the effect the Cultural Revolution had on China’s social climate during the late twentieth century. Beginning in 1966, six years after my father was born, the Cultural Revolution was a movement spurred on by the Communist Party with the purpose of cleansing China of traditional, capitalist, and bourgeois thought and revitalizing the country with Maoist philosophies. The movement essentially sought to reverse traditional social order by uplifting the proletariat and ‘reeducating’ the intelligentsia and bourgeois. ‘Reeducation’ ranged from stripping people of their status and wealth, to sending people ‘down to the countryside’ to learn the peasant experience, to systematic abuse, torture, and imprisonment. The estimated death toll in the first three years of the Cultural Revolution was half a million people. However, in present day, the Cultural Revolution is often portrayed in a positive light as a time of rebirth and industrialization. The Cultural Revolution is a challenging event to analyze because it has many contradicting connotations in China’s collective memory – though many experienced the violence and chaos of the time firsthand, there is little public discussion and reports on the events are largely fabricated by official sources. 
      In sociological terms, the initial agenda of the Cultural Revolution was a large-scale reallocation of cultural capital. Cultural capital, as defined by Pierre Bourdieu in his seminal work “The Forms of Capital”, is a form of symbolic social currency that can be used to access social resources (Bourdieu 1973). Cultural capital confers power and status, but is not, in and of itself, power or status. Cultural capital’s place as a purely symbolic asset is what makes it liquid; that is, cultural capital can be reallocated and redefined specifically because it is symbolic. During the Cultural Revolution, cultural capital was forcibly reallocated by the Communist Party. Those who had cultural capital before the Cultural Revolution – the wealthy, educated, or politically well-connected – suddenly found themselves persecuted because their cultural capital was devalued. Conversely, those with previously little cultural capital, such as peasants and laborers, were all of a sudden lauded and championed by the government. 
      The stories of people who gained or lost immense amounts of cultural capital essentially overnight shook the country’s psyche in an important way. For my parents, this instability was integral in developing a critical understanding of cultural capital. Both sets of my grandparents were professors, and were consequently relocated to the countryside by the government after their universities were closed. For the duration of the Cultural Revolution, my paternal grandparents, previously highly respected professors of endocrinology, were forced to work as pig farmers in a rural village. This was a relatively tame consequence; growing up, my parents knew many people, some former professors like my grandparents, who were killed or tortured as victims of struggle sessions, one of the Communist Party’s many forms of shaping public opinion. Seeing the ways that cultural capital can be lost quickly and without meaning unmasks the symbolic and temporary nature of cultural capital. Though the Cultural Revolution was a time ripe with propaganda hailing the virtues of Maoist thought, those that experienced firsthand the senseless violence and chaos during the time were forced to think critically about those values. Learning the malleability and transience of cultural capital had a lasting effect on my parents, and became especially useful for them later in life as immigrants moving through a foreign country’s social structure.
      The Cultural Revolution also had a tremendous influence on education in China. The history of education in China is complicated by its relationship with the state, as education was historically integral to attaining a government position. In present day, the importance of education is just as great, as one’s educational trajectory almost certainly determines one’s career opportunities later in life. Taking the gaokao is considered by many to be the most important moment of one’s life – in fact, students often do not take college seriously and cease to work hard because the admission to a certain caliber college is essentially equivalent to admission to a certain career path. The educational system in China has always been highly selective and stratifying. Students often begin academic testing in middle school, and are placed into schools based on their performance. Similarly, the extremely rigorous National College Entrance Exam, colloquially known as the ‘gaokao’, decides what university a student would attend, which would then determine their career opportunities later in life. Because of the historic essentialism of education in China, it was incredible that schools were closed for nearly the duration of the Cultural Revolution. University entrance examinations were suspended in 1966, and the first examination after the end of the Cultural Revolution was officially held in 1977, more than ten years later. 
      In the wake of such extended political turmoil, the reinstatement of the national college entrance exam in 1977 was a breath of fresh air. The exam was symbolic of the possibility of upward mobility, and ignited renewed fervor in the belief of achievement ideology. Taking the gaokao in the 1980s, my parents’ aspirations were directly impacted by the popularity of these beliefs. The Cultural Revolution’s impact on cultural capital directly affected people’s understanding of the possibility of upward mobility. Cultural capital is essential to upward mobility, the achievement of higher social status, because it enables access to different status groups (MacLeod 2009). Cultural capital allows membership within certain groups, and is therefore the ‘key’ in passing boundaries that inhibit social mobility (Bourdieu 1973). As cultural capital is the driving force behind social mobility, the events of the Cultural Revolution that compromised the security of cultural capital equally compromised the public’s trust in previously understood channels of social mobility. Thus, the reinstatement of the ‘gaokao’ was symbolic of the return to older, secure channel of social mobility. Even my mother, who took it six years later in 1983, remembers how widely respected the examination was because of its representation of the historically important Chinese educational system. 
      In large part, the renewed trust in the ‘gaokao’ and educational system at large served to reinforce the achievement ideology present in the Chinese educational system. Achievement ideology is the belief that social status can be attained through hard work and achievement (MacLeod 2009). This ideology promotes the belief that success is based on merit, and inequality is due to individual differences in ambition and ability (Ibid). The practice of separating students into groups based on their achievement, as well as the direct link between college admission and future career path fosters this ideology. In particular, after the Cultural Revolution, where structural factors played the primary role in determining individuals’ lives, the idea of having agency over one’s life trajectory was very appealing. Achievement ideology champions the individual as having ultimate agency over their own success. The renewed trust in China’s educational system after the Cultural Revolution was directly linked with academic achievement ideology. Moreover, the hope for upward mobility from education gave people high aspirations. MacLeod argues that aspiration interacts with achievement ideology and plays a key role in a person’s success; here, high aspirations due to the prospect of academic achievement reinforces the tenants of achievement ideology (MacLeod 2009). It is important to note as a caveat that achievement ideology is notably flawed. The belief does not take into account the structural inequalities that make social status not just earned, but also inherited (Ibid). Regardless, at the time, the end of the Cultural Revolution and the reinstatement of the gaokao caused achievement ideology to be upheld and reinforced.
      All of these educational factors combined set the stage for my parents’ immigration to the United States. My parents’ unique grasp of cultural capital as well as their ability to succeed academically, factors directly tied to being the first generation to go to college after the Cultural Revolution, made it possible for them to achieve upward mobility as student immigrants to the US. At the time, only the top students from the top universities had a chance of securing a scholarship to study in the United States. Both of my parents were top students at their universities – my father attended the sixth highest ranked university, and my mother the fifth. It is important to note that, while my parents’ academic success was undoubtedly influenced by structural components affecting their aspirations, it would be remiss to only attribute their success to these factors. Though the circumstances were largely affected by structural factors, my parents’ own work and effort made their success possible. The influences of structure and agency with regard to my parents’ success are highly entangled, but for the purpose of this paper the focus is on structure.
      Ultimately, my parents were able to achieve upward social mobility in the United States through a purposefully instrumental treatment of assimilation. Immigrating to the United States, my parents understood that they were largely disadvantaged. However, they were primed to approach the country’s foreign social structure in a way that made use of their unique understanding of the inner workings of cultural capital, and furthermore had a leg up in attaining upward mobility by their direct entry into the somewhat familiar academic world. Moreover, as outsiders, they were able to recognize assimilation, the process of conforming to the host country’s norms in order to achieve cultural capital, was an effective strategy for achieving status (Milner 1994, Zhou 2008). Under these circumstances, my parents were able to develop an instrumental approach to acculturation in the US; that is, they had the unique ability to view assimilation as a temporary tool for upward mobility, a simple means to an end. My parents practiced this instrumental approach to social barriers often in day-to-day life. Growing up, whenever I would complain about the meaningless of a task that was simply a means to an end, they would admonish me for belittling the use of “qiao men zhuan” – literally, ‘a door knocker’. The phrase figuratively represents the use of an inherently temporary tool to ‘knock on the door’ and receive entry – you use the doorknocker, then leave it behind. Indeed, a “qiao men zhuan” is only useful insofar as it can be thrown away. 
      However, my parents’ instrumental approach to acculturation was only made possible by the privilege of immigrating to the United States as students. Assimilation, purposeful or not, requires time and practice. Bourdieu’s concept of habitus, the embodied set of dispositions, skills, and tastes of people with similar levels of cultural capital, is useful here (Bourdieu 1973). Assimilation, with regard to habitus, can be seen as the process of adopting another group’s socially reproduced values with the purpose of acquiring the linked cultural capital. As immigrants, for better or worse, earning ‘tokens’ of cultural capital through assimilation is a way to achieve upward mobility. University as a point of entry not only provided what is essentially a physical certificate of cultural capital – a diploma – but also time to practice the social skills and habits that allow them to assimilate. Furthermore, the nature of my parents’ academic success, such as the rigor of the Chinese educational system and the parallels between China’s and America’s academic achievement ideology, gave them translatable skills in America. By entering America by means of university, my parents had the privilege of immediately earning cultural capital in the form of a degree. 
      It is crucial to note that the story of immigrant acculturation in the US is, by and large, not defined by stories like my parents’. There is tremendous social pressure to conform, even though conformity creates a myriad of other problem (Kazinitz, 2008). Some scholars fear that the unwillingness of today’s immigrants to assimilate to American culture – their “unassimilability” – will lead to the societal burden of a “new underclass” (Borjas 1999, Huntington 2004, cited by Zhou et al 2008). Not only does this assumption ignore the overwhelming evidence that shows that recent immigrant families achieve social and economic mobility comparable to or greater than that of earlier European immigrants, it also makes a dangerously broad assumption about the implicit value of assimilation and social mobility (Zhou 2008). Without a doubt, assimilation is a valuable tool for achieving social mobility – by adopting preapproved habitus, immigrants can compensate for a lack of inherited cultural capital with learned social behavior (Milner 1994). Ultimately, assimilation, as a form of conformity or association, is only a very limited channel for social mobility. 
      If we understand culture as the intermediary between structure and agency, we see that my family’s culture of instrumentality derives from their belief that hard work and achievement are the only agentic means of overcoming structural disadvantages (MacLeod 2009). The odds against my parents upon entering the United States were invariably stacked – the only place where their race, socioeconomic class, and language barrier did not matter was in their math and engineering classes, where an A could be earned based on sweat and tears alone. However, their unique upbringing and status as the first generation of people to attend college after the Cultural Revolution gave them perspective about upward mobility and cultural capital as well as translatable academic skills that were invaluable tools during their immigration to the US. The hard work my parents put into attending university is, intentionally or not, a form of instrumental assimilation; for my parents, learning the language, adopting the customs, and ‘playing by the rules’ of the Untied States by earning a degree was a tool with which to achieve cultural capital and upward mobility – a true ‘qiao men zhuan’. 
      
      
