Lily Xie


      The audience of an artistic representation of a human right violation differs from any other audience because they bear a burden of social responsibility. They are essentially spectators through the eyes of the creators, who are spectators themselves, and have thus a type of second-degree bystander responsibility. The creators of this type of representation bear a similar responsibility and, though the burden is greater on the creator’s end than on the viewer’s, these two roles are intrinsically connected, as neither can exist on its own. Art is created to be seen by an audience, and how an audience sees that art in turn informs the creation of art itself. However, unlike artistic representation of other ideas, which can be for the purpose of entertainment, communication, display of craft and so on, there are real human lives at stake with artistic representations of human rights violations. Thus, it is imperative to portray the subjects of these violations carefully. Diana Taylor, in her article, “Disappearing Bodies: Writing Torture and Torture as Writing”, writes that the creator must portray their subject in a way that does not makes the viewer feel like they are “just watching”, a position associated with disempowerment and voyeurism, and instead makes them engaged without simplifying or idealizing the subject1. A common method used to strike a balance is the invoking of the audience’s empathy to humanize the subject. In “I’m Your Horse in the Night”, author Luiza Valenzuela employs a style of narrative that invokes in the reader the same senses of disorientation and pain that the subject feels, the effect of which is both humanizing and objectifying. 
       “I’m Your Horse in the Night” uses literary devices to evoke in the reader the senses of uncertainty and loss present during Argentina’s Dirty War. To ensure that the reader can be emotionally invested in the story she is telling, Valenzuela writes in a narrative style that itself invokes in the reader feelings of disorientation and confusion that directly mirror the emotions felt by the subjects in her story. The story begins with the reunification of the narrator and Beto, her lover who has returned from an unknown location.  Valenzuela purposefully leaves out introduction or background for the dual purpose of denying the reader a reference point, thus disorienting him, and of emphasizing the narrator’s own disorientation caused by Beto’s own silence and reluctance to give background information. Beto reenters the narrator’s life in silence and the first words the narrator wants to say are her theories pertaining to where he has been, a long, varied list:
I thought you were fighting up north
I thought you’d been caught.
I thought you were hiding.
I thought you’d been tortured or killed.
I thought you were theorizing about the revolution in another country2.
      
To this Beto replies, “Quiet, Chiquita. You’re much better off not knowing what I’ve been up to”3. Valenzuela, in Beto’s silence and the narrator’s listing of possibilities, effectively inserts theories of Beto’s absence, the validity of which we are left to speculate on for the rest of the story, into our minds without giving a definite answer that would put an end to the speculation. Similarly, the narrator herself can only speculate on where Beto has been and never finds a definitive answer. At the end of the story, the narrator reveals that the situation outlined in the beginning of the story was not real, and rather that it was a dream, as Beto vanished six months before. Our confidence in our knowledge of the situation is again compromised, and this finale leads us to question the validity not only of the narrator’s theories on Beto’s whereabouts but also Beto’s existence itself and the reliability of the narrator. The reader of “I’m Your Horse in the Night” is purposefully led on a journey of doubt and confusion by the author, a journey that mirrors the protagonist’s in the story. 
      The purpose of this arguably ‘unreliable’ story is to allow to reader to understand the feelings of the subject in the context of history and human rights violations. Historical context informs the understanding that these feelings of disorientation are not because the narrator is unreliable, but rather because the narrator’s reality is unreliable. Valenzuela, an Argentinian author born in 1938, wrote largely in response to the horrors of the Dirty War. “I’m Your Horse in the Night” in particular addresses the estimated 9,000 to 30,000 ‘disappeared’ people, or ‘desaparecidos’, that were victims of the War. There is a logical disconnect to the concept of a disappeared person – it is impossible for a person to simply disappear; yet, the reality of the situation is that the person is gone. When a person disappears, the persistence of memory expects that person to exist in every sense of reality, though in actuality they do not. The narrator of “I’m Your Horse in the Night” has a Beto-shaped gap in her expected reality and psychological narrative; the form of Beto, though technically only a figment of the narrator’s imagination, is still central to her living reality in a way that affirms his existence, if only in the non-physical realm. Valenzuela presents this disconnect between expectation and reality very well by incorporating disconnected and disorienting elements into her written narrative. This artistic representation of the surreal experience of someone who has lost a loved one in the wake of the Dirty War is relatable to the reader because the reader himself experiences the represented emotions while reading the representation. In this way, the survivors of the Dirty War are humanized, as this connect in emotion between subject and audience brings the two closer together. 
      However, this mechanism of empathy is useful only to the extent of empathy itself, if it is useful at all. The reader is forced by Valenzuela to relate to her protagonist, and ultimately draws upon his own experiences of reading the text to relate to the emotions of the protagonist, whom the reader then takes as an example of the larger community of those affected by the disappearances during the Dirty War. The story’s reveal at the end includes a description in parenthesis of the brutal torture the narrator survived. Quite obviously, the emotions of the reader and those of the subject are, for the most part, incomparable. In projecting their emotions onto the subjects’, the reader inadvertently deprives the subject of their own humanity. Taylor writes, “Somewhere behind those images [of the disappeared], and simultaneously occluded and illuminated by them, one images the ‘real’ bodies […] the reality of their ordeal becomes unreal to us through the very process of trying to illuminate it”4. Indeed, the situation of artistically representing ‘disappeared’ people is unique in that there is no way to avoid objectification, as the lack of a human body to write about inherently dehumanizes the disappeared subjects. Taylor recognizes the contradictory nature of attempting to represent ‘disappeared’ bodies; nonetheless, she argues that, as not representing atrocity is equivalent to condoning atrocity, the question needs to be not whether atrocity is represented but rather how. Valenzuela, having recognized this, ensures that the graphic parenthetical description in “I’m Your Horse in the Night” shocks with intention to ground the reader and remind him of his distance from the subject of this story. The specificity of the descriptions, in contrast to the lack of information earlier in the story, reverses the assumed universality of this story, reminding the reader of the individual humanity of the subjects. By doing so, Valenzuela is striking a careful balance, which Taylor implies must be struck when artistically representing atrocities. 
      The most important thing to remember when analyzing representations of human rights violations, Taylor notes, is that not representing is not an option. Though she means this in the sense that not representing these violations is unconscionable because it condones the atrocity, it may also be true that not representing an atrocity is not even a possibility in and of itself. In the wake of an episode of human suffering, the healing process must occur, and typically includes the representation of such suffering. In terms of trauma, healing from trauma necessitates the reexamining of a traumatic event in order to strip power away from it by situating it into narrative memory. Only by the formation of a narrative account of events can trauma, traumatic inherently because of its non-narrative nature, be healed. In the case of the Dirty War, this type of narrative is difficult if not impossible to form exactly because of the ‘disappeared’ people. Information is missing from the collective narrative memory of Argentina during this time period, and strongly impairs the ability for the nation to remember and heal from its own history. Regardless of how well its history may be artistically represented to the public, in both a legal and psychological sense, Argentina lacks evidence about the Dirty War, and this makes it difficult for healing, which the nation must do before its people forget. 
      
      
      
Aesthetic representations of human rights violations can benefit, undercut or weaken human rights advocacy. Certain aesthetic representations can become one or, at best, two- dimensional. Such representations work best with a well-informed reader/viewer who might be able to tackle/challenge much of the overlooked, unsaid, or irreconcilable historical, social or moral positionings embodied in the representations.
 
       Based on the readings we have done this semester, articulate and discuss benefits as well as perils of aesthetic narrating, staging or dramatizing human rights violations.
       
       
The question that should be asked about the representation of violence and atrocity is not whether it should be done but how. Not representing atrocity is akin to accepting it, and leads inevitably to the continuation of and lack of opposition against said atrocity. The manner in which such a thing is represented, however, is far more contentious. The issue with representation lies with the intentions and reactions of the parties involved - the creator, the viewer, and the subject. There is no way yet seen for all three to be appeased, and therein lies the problem. 

This issue is magnified in the case of Argentina especially, as there is the complexity of the 'disappeared' body, an image that inherently defies representation. These estimated 9,000 to 30,000 disappeared peoples, or desaparecidos, are difficult subjects to represent because of the mystery and danger surrounding their disappearances. The political context of the desaparecidos adds yet another layer to this issue. In the context of any atrocity which is followed by human rights prosecution, there is the additional role of representation as a legal force in prosecuting those involved in the violation of human rights. This purpose of representation, however, is more difficult to be translated from courtroom to public. As Diana Taylor writes in her article “Disappearing Bodies: Writing Torture and Torture as Writing”, testimonies can be empowering in the sense that they are used to restore justice and bring about political change in the courtroom, but once brought outside, can possibly be disempowering through the stark honesty of its contents. The layperson, who does not have the power to effect change, when faced with the language of a testimony, could be forced into a position of ‘just watching’, thus being made to feel voyeuristic and further disempowered.  This is again the issue of a difference in intention and reaction of the creator, viewer, and subject. In this case, the creator and subject are the same, a victim of the crimes committed in Argentina, and write with intent to bring about judicial changes. If the viewer is a person with legal power to effect that change, then the desired result is brought about. However, if the viewer is anyone else, the opposite effect is made. 

On the opposite side of the spectrum from legal testimonial writing is literary testimonial writing. This form of writing has its own complexities – because a literary author has the artistic privilege to represent their memory in the way that most accurately conveys to the reader their experience, which may not necessarily correspond to representing their memory in a most factual way, they can reach out to the relatively powerless viewer, but at the risk of marginalizing and disempowering themselves or their own story. One hope of literary testimonies would be to incite a reader to action, but at what cost? A truly accurate portrayal of violence and atrocity would traumatize a reader into paralysis, or even traumatize the author as well, which is the opposite of the desired effect; however, at times, for the reader to be truly motivated towards action, the true, accurate story in all of its horror cannot be told. 

There is furthermore the question of to what extent a story can be told in certain places. The problem of representation of the reality of atrocity lies in to what extent it would be understood or believed. In Argentina, for example, there is the linguistic problem of representing a group of people inherently known as disappeared, invisible people. The language surrounding the history of the desaparecidos as well as the language of the regimes that effected the violence upon them has been, to some extent, normalized. Marguerite Feitlowitz writes in "A Lexicon of Terror: Argentina and the Legacies of Torture", "Appallingly, many of the expressions originating with torturers in the camps have become part of current slang, a sign of the extent to which the population has internalized that part of Argentine history" (xi). With the language of violence so ingrained in a society, the representation of the brutality is made far more difficult. 
      
      