
      The foundation of realist thought is the central belief that international politics is constantly in a state of conflict. The actual reasoning behind this theory is somewhat open to interpretation; neo-realists cite the anarchical structure of the international system while classical realists focus more on human nature as the cause of conflict. Regardless of where conflict originates sociologically, the logic behind realist thought relies on calculations of power gain and risk. The state, the primary actor according to realist theory, is driven by self-interest, resulting that it will rationally do anything in the name of preserving power and diminishing risk. Thus, this system of international politics is one of zero sum gain – the gain of one actor inherently effects the loss of another. Though the theory of realism accurately describes the actions of many states through history, its conclusion on the condition of international relations being one of zero-sum gain is faulty, especially with the rise of international trade. It is the failure of realism to account for mutual benefit in trade and its effects on diplomacy in an increasingly codependent world that makes the theory simplistic.
      The relationship between China and India illustrates this exception to the theory of realism. Centrally, the fact that China and India, the world’s two fastest growing economies, are notably codependent points to complexities that reaches beyond a simply conflict-based realist state of international relations. In an ideal market, both parties gain from trade, defying the realist notion of a zero sum stage.  The bilateral trade between the two nations supersedes the dimension of conflict, as the increase of individual power depends on a mutual increase of power. Especially because, together, the populations of these two countries constitute more than a third of the world’s population, the Chinese-Indian relationship as an exception to the rule of realism is impossible to ignore. Though China and India have a long history colored by conflict and war, the substantial changes to the two countries’ bilateral trade policies in the past ten years points to a future of stability that defies the rules of realism. 
      Since the late 1990s, bilateral trade between the two countries has grown exponentially. In the five years between 2000 and 2005 alone, China-India trade increased from around $3 billion to $20 billion, and in June of 2012, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh agreed to take steps to ensure that bilateral trade reach $100 billion by 2015.12 China is India’s largest trading partner and the top source of India’s imports, accounting for approximately 10% of India’s annual imports.3 In June 2012, Le Keqiang, the First Vice-Premier of the PRC, said to an Indian foreign minister that Chinese-India ties would be the most important bilateral relationship in the 21st century.4 
      However, the two countries have a shared history of conflict, the majority of which is due to border disputes and Soviet-era disagreements, the complexity of which is impossible to fully flesh out at this time. The two countries began the process of rebuilding diplomatic and economic ties in the 1980s, though conflict persisted between the two nations until more concrete trade agreements were fostered in the late 1990s, coinciding with the leap in both economic growth and diplomatic peacemaking. It seems that the two countries’ bilateral trade is the key instrument in facilitating their relationship and resolving long-standing political conflict. The theory of realism seems to hold true in analyzing Chinese-Indian relationships up until the change in the two countries’ trade relationship in the late 1990s. Disputes over land, the majority of Chinese-Indian conflict, is a clear sign of power conflict and struggle according to realists. However, the overwhelming evidence of the two countries’ mutual dependence in trade and the simultaneous surge in peace making and diplomacy can only point to the fact that conflict is not the only factor affecting international relations. Mutual investments on the economic stage guarantee that the two countries must also be mutually invested diplomatically. The risk of conflict is greatly increased when a substantial amount of trade and trade deficit is owned by the opposite country. Furthermore, in an increasingly cosmopolitan market, the ability or desire to be fiscally independent is dropping exponentially. As relationships between states become more and more complicated by mutual dependence and gains from trade, the realist theory of an international stage based on self-interest and conflict seems increasingly simplistic and, indeed, unrealistic. 
      It is important to note, however, that it is the conclusion and not the statements about realism that seem at fault. The argument that states act primarily out of self-interest still holds in the relationship between China and India – the two states both gain individually from being codependent. The assumptions made about the international market are very similar to the assumptions made about international relations in that both systems rely on actors dictated by self-interest. However, unlike zero sum realist theory, market theory rests heavily upon the understanding that both parties gain from trade. Perhaps, on a grander scale, one could argue that, due to a finite number of resources, consumers and producers, universal gain from trade is impossible – there are always externalities. Moving forward, in an increasingly cosmopolitan and codependent world, the conclusions made from realist thought must be reevaluated and suited to fit evolving economic and diplomatic relationships. 